PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
SUMMARY OF UNION BUDGET 2026-27
YUVA SHAKTI-DRIVEN BUDGET EMPHASIZES ON GOVERNMENT’S ‘SANKALP’
TO FOCUS ON POOR, UNDERPRIVILEGED AND THE DISADVANTAGED
FIRST BUDGET PREPARED IN KARTAVYA BHAWAN INSPIRED BY 3 KARTAVYA
FIRST KARTAVYA IS TO ACCELERATE AND SUSTAIN ECONOMIC GROWTH
SECOND KARTAVYA IS TO FULFIL ASPIRATIONS OF PEOPLE AND BUILD
THEIR CAPACITY
THIRD KARTAVYA, ALIGNED WITH VISION OF SABKA SATH, SABKA VIKAS
NEW INCOME TAX ACT, 2025 TO COME INTO EFFECT FROM APRIL 2026,
SIMPLIFIED INCOME TAX RULES AND FORMS TO BE NOTIFIED
SHORTLY
MULTIPLICITY OF PROCEEDINGS TO BE REDUCED TO RATIONALISE
PENALTY AND PROSECUTION
DEDUCTION ALREADY AVAILABLE TO CERTAIN PRIMARY COOPERATIVE
SOCIETIES TO BE EXTENDED TO CATTLE FEED AND COTTON SEED
SINGLE CATEGORY OFINFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SERVICES WITH
COMMON SAFE HARBOUR MARGIN OF 15.5%
2000 CRORE THRESHOLD FOR AVAILING SAFE HARBOUR FOR IT SERVICES,
UP FROM 300 CRORE RUPEES
FOREIGN CLOUD SERVICE PROVIDER TO BE GIVEN TAX HOLIDAY TILL 2047
EXEMPTION FROM MINIMUM ALTERNATE TAX TO ALL NON-RESIDENTS
PAYING TAX ON PRESUMPTIVE BASIS
MINISTRY TO SET UP JOINT COMMITTEE TO MODIFY IndAS TO DO AWAY
WITH SEPARATE ACCOUNTING REQUIREMENT BASED ON ICDS FROM TAX
YEAR 2027-28
STT ON FUTURES TO BE RAISED TO 0.05% FROM PRESENT 0.02%
BASIC CUSTOMS DUTY EXEMPTION GIVEN TO CAPITAL GOODS USED FOR
MANUFACTURING LITHIUM-ION CELLS FOR BATTERIES TO BE EXTENDED.
BASIC CUSTOMS DUTY TO THE IMPORT OF CAPITAL GOODS REQUIRED FOR
PROCESSING OF CRITICAL MINERALS TO BE EXEMPTED
TARIFF RATE ON ALL DUTIABLE GOODS IMPORTED FOR PERSONAL USE TO
BE REDUCED FROM 20% TO 10%
BASIC CUSTOMS DUTY ON 17 DRUGS OR MEDICINES TO BE EXEMPTED.
BIOPHARMA SHAKTI WITH AN OUTLAY OF ₹ 10,000 CRORES TO BUILD THE
ECOSYSTEM FOR DOMESTIC PRODUCTION OF BIOLOGICS AND BIOSIMILARS
₹10,000 CRORE SME GROWTH FUND PROPOSED TO CREATE MSME’S AS
FUTURE CHAMPIONS
PUBLIC CAPEX ENHANCED FROM ₹11.2 LAKH CRORE IN BE 2025-26 TO ₹12.2
LAKH CRORE IN FY 2026-27
SEVEN HIGH-SPEED RAIL CORRIDORS BETWEEN CITIES WILL BE DEVELOPED
AS ‘GROWTH CONNECTORS’ TO PROMOTE ENVIRONMENTALLY
SUSTAINABLE PASSENGER SYSTEMS
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF CREATIVE TECHNOLOGIES, MUMBAI TO SETUP AVGC
CONTENT CREATOR LABS IN 15,000 SECONDARY SCHOOLS AND 500
COLLEGES
TO ADDRESS THE CHALLENGES FOR GIRL STUDENTS IN HIGHER EDUCATION
STEM INSTITUTIONS, ONE GIRLS HOSTEL WILL BE ESTABLISHED IN EVERY
DISTRICT
GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCES A SCHEME FOR UPSKILLING 10,000 GUIDES IN 20
TOURIST SITES THROUGH A STANDARDIZED, HIGH-QUALITY 12-WEEK
TRAINING COURSE IN HYBRID MODE, IN COLLABORATION WITH AN IIM
KHELO INDIA MISSION TO TRANSFORM THE SPORTS SECTOR OVER THE
NEXT DECADE
BHARAT-VISTAAR, A MULTILINGUAL AI TOOL TO INTEGRATE THE
AGRISTACK PORTALS AND THE ICAR PACKAGE ON AGRICULTURAL
PRACTICES WITH AI SYSTEMS
OVERSEAS TOUR PROGRAM PACKAGE REDUCED FROM THE CURRENT
5 PERCENT AND 20 PERCENT TO 2 PERCENT
CUSTOMS WAREHOUSING FRAMEWORK TO BE TRANSFORMED INTO A
WAREHOUSE OPERATOR-CENTRIC SYSTEM WITH SELF-DECLARATIONS,
ELECTRONIC TRACKING AND RISK-BASED AUDIT
CARGO CLEARANCE APPROVALS FROM VARIOUS GOVERNMENT AGENCIES
TO BE SEAMLESSLY PROCESSED THROUGH A SINGLE AND INTERCONNECTED
DIGITAL WINDOW BY END OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs, Smt Nirmala Sitharaman presented the Union
Budget 2026-2027 in Parliament today.
PART-A
On the sacred occasion of Magha Purnima and the birth anniversary of Guru Ravidas, the
Finance Minister said, as this is the first Budget prepared in Kartavya Bhawan, it is inspired by 3
kartavya:
1. First kartavya is to accelerate and sustain economic growth, by enhancing productivity
and competitiveness, and building resilience to volatile global dynamics.
2. Second kartavya is to fulfil aspirations of people and build their capacity, making them
strong partners in India’s path to prosperity
3. Third kartavya, aligned with vision of Sabka Sath, Sabka Vikas, is to ensure that every
family, community, region and sector has access to resources, amenities and
opportunities for meaningful participation.
Presenting the Yuva Shakti-driven Budget which emphasizes on Government’s ‘Sankalp’ to
focus on poor, underprivileged and the disadvantaged, the Finance Minister said, India will
continue to take confident steps towards Viksit Bharat, balancing ambition with inclusion. As a
growing economy with expanding trade and capital needs, India must also remain deeply
integrated with global markets, exporting more and attracting stable long-term investment.
She also mentioned that the country is facing an external environment in which trade and
multilateralism are imperilled and access to resources and supply chains are disrupted. New
technologies are transforming production systems while sharply increasing demands on water,
energy and critical minerals.
The Finance Minister said that after the Prime Minister’s announcement on Independence Day in
2025, over 350 reforms have been rolled out. These include GST simplification, notification of
Labour Codes, and rationalisation of mandatory Quality Control Orders. High Level Committees
have been formed and in parallel, the Central Government is working with the State
Governments on deregulation and reducing compliance requirements.
Under the first kartavya to accelerate and sustain economic growth, interventions were
proposed in six areas:
i) Scaling up manufacturing in 7 strategic and frontier sectors;
ii) Rejuvenating legacy industrial sectors;
iii) Creating “Champion MSMEs”;
iv) Delivering a powerful push to Infrastructure;
v) Ensuring long-term energy security and stability; and
vi) Developing City Economic Regions
To develop India as a global Biopharma manufacturing hub, the Biopharma SHAKTI with an
outlay of ₹ 10,000 crores to build the ecosystem for domestic production of biologics and
biosimilars will be set up over the next 5 years. The Strategy will include a Biopharma-focused
network with 3 new National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER) and
upgrading 7 existing ones. It will also create a network of over 1000 accredited India Clinical
Trials sites. The Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation will be strengthened to meet
global standards and approval timeframes through a dedicated scientific review cadre and
specialists.
For the labour-intensive Textile Sector, an Integrated Programme with 5 sub-parts was proposed:
The National Fibre Scheme for self-reliance in natural fibres such as silk, wool and jute, man-
made fibres, and new-age fibres; Textile Expansion and Employment Scheme to modernise
traditional clusters with capital support for machinery, technology upgradation and common
testing and certification centres; A National Handloom and Handicraft programme to integrate
and strengthen existing schemes and ensure targeted support for weavers and artisans; Tex-Eco
Initiative to promote globally competitive and sustainable textiles and apparels; Samarth 2.0 to
modernize and upgrade the textile skilling ecosystem through collaboration with industry and
academic institutions.
Recognising MSMEs as a vital engine of growth, a dedicated ₹10,000 crore SME Growth Fund
was proposed to create future Champions, incentivizing enterprises based on select criteria.
The Finance Minister said, Public capex has increased manifold from ₹2 lakh crore in FY2014-
15 to an allocation of ₹11.2 lakh crore in BE 2025-26. In FY2026-27, she proposed to increase it
to ₹12.2 lakh crore to continue the momentum.
To promote environmentally sustainable movement of cargo, the Finance Minister proposed new
Dedicated Freight Corridors connecting Dankuni in the East, to Surat in the West; b)
operationalise 20 new National Waterways (NW) over next 5 years, starting with NW-5 in
Odisha to connect mineral rich areas of Talcher and Angul and industrial centres like Kalinga
Nagar to the Ports of Paradeep and Dhamra. Training Institutes will be set up as Regional
Centres of Excellence for development of the required manpower.
The Budget aims to further amplify the potential of cities to deliver the economic power of
agglomerations by mapping city economic regions (CER), based on their specific growth drivers.
An allocation of ₹ 5000 crore per CER over 5 years is proposed for implementing their plans
through a challenge mode with a reform-cum-results based financing mechanism.
To promote environmentally sustainable passenger systems, seven High-Speed Rail corridors
between cities will be developed as ‘growth connectors’, namely i) Mumbai-Pune, ii) Pune-
Hyderabad, iii) Hyderabad-Bengaluru, iv) Hyderabad-Chennai, v) Chennai-Bengaluru, vi) Delhi-
Varanasi, vii) Varanasi-Siliguri.
The Finance Minister said that second kartavya is to fulfil aspirations and build capacity. Close
to 25 crore individuals have come out of multidimensional poverty through a decade of
Government’s sustained and reform-oriented efforts.
To promote India as a hub for medical tourism services, the Finance Minister proposed a Scheme
to support States in establishing five Regional Medical Hubs, in partnership with the private
sector. These Hubs will serve as integrated healthcare complexes that combine medical,
educational and research facilities. They will have AYUSH Centres, Medical Value Tourism
Facilitation Centres and infrastructure for diagnostics, post-care and rehabilitation. These Hubs
will provide diverse job opportunities for health professionals including doctors and AHPs.
To scale up availability of veterinary professionals by more than 20,000, a loan-linked capital
subsidy was proposed to support scheme for establishment of veterinary and para vet colleges,
veterinary hospitals, diagnostic laboratories and breeding facilities in the private sector.
India’s Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming and Comics (AVGC) sector is a growing industry,
projected to require 2 million professionals by 2030. The Finance Minister proposed to support
the Indian Institute of Creative Technologies, Mumbai in setting up AVGC Content Creator Labs
in 15,000 secondary schools and 500 colleges.
In Higher Education STEM institutions, prolonged hours of study and laboratory work pose
some challenges for girl students. Through VGF/capital support, 1 girls hostel will be established
in every district.
The Finance Minister proposed to set up a National Institute of Hospitality by upgrading the
existing National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology. It will function as a
bridge between academia, industry and the Government. She further proposed a pilot scheme for
upskilling 10,000 guides in 20 tourist sites through a standardized, high-quality 12-week training
course in hybrid mode, in collaboration with an Indian Institute of Management.
Taking forward the systematic nurturing of sports talent which is set in motion through the Khelo
India programme, the Finance Minister proposed to launch a Khelo India Mission to transform
the Sports sector over the next decade. The Mission will facilitate: a) An integrated talent
development pathway, supported by training centres b) systematic development of coaches and
support staff; c) integration of sports science and technology; d) competitions and leagues to
promote sports culture and provide platforms; and, e) development of sports infrastructure for
training and competition.
The Finance Minister said that the Budget’s third kartavya aligns with the vision of Sabka Sath,
Sabka Vikas towards a Viksit Bharat. This requires targeted efforts for increasing farmer
incomes, empowering Divyangjan, empowering the vulnerable to access mental health and
trauma care, focus on the Purvodaya States and the North-East Region to accelerate development
and employment opportunities.
The Finance Minister proposed Bharat-VISTAAR (Virtually Integrated System to Access
Agricultural Resources), a multilingual AI tool that shall integrate the AgriStack portals and the
ICAR package on agricultural practices with AI systems. This will enhance farm productivity,
enable better decisions for farmers and reduce risk by providing customised advisory support.
Building on the success of the Lakhpati Didi Programme, Self-Help Entrepreneur (SHE) Marts
will be set up as community-owned retail outlets within the cluster level federations through
enhanced and innovative financing instruments.
Reaffirming the commitment to Mental Health and Trauma Care, the Finance Minister
announced to setup a NIMHANS-2 and also upgrade National Mental Health Institutes in Ranchi
and Tezpur as Regional Apex Institutions.
She further proposed the development of an integrated East Coast Industrial Corridor with a
well-connected node at Durgapur, creation of 5 tourism destinations in the 5 Purvodaya States,
and the provision of 4,000 e-buses. She also proposed to launch a Scheme for Development of
Buddhist Circuits in Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Assam, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura. The
Scheme will cover preservation of temples and monasteries, pilgrimage interpretation centers,
connectivity and pilgrim amenities.
Fiscal Consolidation
The debt-to-GDP ratio is estimated to be 55.6 percent of GDP in BE 2026-27, compared to 56.1
percent of GDP in RE 2025-26. A declining debt-to-GDP ratio will gradually free up resources
for priority sector expenditure by reducing the outgo on interest payments. In RE 2025-26, the
fiscal deficit has been estimated at par with BE of 2025-26 at 4.4 percent of GDP. In line with
the new fiscal prudence path of debt consolidation, the fiscal deficit in BE 2026-27 is estimated
to be 4.3 percent of GDP.
Revised Estimates 2025-26
The Revised Estimates of the non-debt receipts are ₹34 lakh crore of which the Centre’s net tax
receipts are ₹26.7 lakh crore. The Revised Estimate of the total expenditure is ₹49.6 lakh crore,
of which the capital expenditure is about ₹11 lakh crore.
Budget Estimates 2026-27
Coming to 2026-27, the non-debt receipts and the expenditure are estimated as ₹36.5 lakh
croreand ₹53.5 lakh crore respectively. The Centre’s net tax receipts are estimated at ₹28.7 lakh
crore.
To finance the fiscal deficit, the net market borrowings from dated securities are estimated at
₹11.7 lakh crore. The balance financing is expected to come from small savings and other
sources. The gross market borrowings are estimated at ₹17.2 lakh crore.
PART-B
Direct Taxes:
In Direct Taxes, many new reforms are proposed in the Union Budget 2026-27. The New
Income tax Act, 2025 will come into effect from April 2026. Also the simplified Income Tax
Rules and Forms will be notified shortly. The forms for the purpose are redesigned for easy
compliance of ordinary citizens.
There is also a proposed reduction in the TCS rates. The Overseas tour program package is
reduced from the current 5 percent and 20 percent to 2 percent without any stipulation of
amount. Further, TCS for pursuing education and for medical purposes under the Liberalized
Remittance Scheme (LRS) reduced from 5 percent to 2 percent.
It is also proposed that the supply of manpower services to be brought within the ambit of
payment to contractors for the purpose of TDS. TDS on these services will be at the rate of either
1 percent or 2 percent only. For small taxpayers, a rule-based automated process will enable
obtaining a lower or nil deduction certificate instead of filing an application with the assessing
officer. Also, the time available for revising returns is proposed to be extended from 31st
December to up to 31st March with the payment of a nominal fee. Further, the timeline for filing
of tax returns is to be staggered.
To address practical issues of small taxpayers, a One-time 6-month foreign asset disclosure
scheme for students, young professionals, tech employees, relocated NRIs, and such others to be
introduced to disclose income or assets below a certain size.
Rationalising Penalty and Prosecution
With a view to rationalizing penalty and prosecution, the Union Budget 2026-27 proposes to
reduce the multiplicity of proceedings. Assessment & penalty proceedings will be integrated by
way of a common order for both. Further, the quantum of pre-payment will be reduced from 20
percent to 10 percent, calculated only on core tax demand. In order to reduce litigations,
taxpayers will be allowed to update their returns even after reassessment proceedings have been
initiated, at an additional 10 percent tax rate over and above the rate applicable for the relevant
year.
The Budget proposes to extend the provisions for immunity from penalty and prosecution in the
cases of under reporting, to misreporting as well. Taxpayer will need to pay 100 percent of the
tax amount as an additional income tax over and above the tax and interest due. In addition,
prosecution framework under the Income Tax Act will be rationalized. Non-production of books
of account and documents, and requirement of TDS payment, where payment is made in kind,
will be decriminalised. Non-disclosure of non-immovable foreign assets with aggregate value
less than 20 lakh rupees will be provided with immunity from prosecution with retrospective
effect from 1.10.2024.
Cooperatives
In her Budget speech in the Parliament today, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman stated that the deduction
already available to a primary cooperative society engaged in supplying milk, oilseeds, fruits or
vegetables raised or grown by its members, will be extended to also include supply of cattle feed
and cotton seed produced by its members. Inter-cooperative society dividend income will be
allowed as deduction under the new tax regime to the extent it is further distributed to its
members. In addition, an exemption of three years is to be allowed to dividend income received
by a notified national cooperative federation, on their investments made in companies up to
31.1.2026, for dividends further distributed to its member co-operatives.
Supporting IT sector as India’s growth engine
Underscoring the significance of the IT sector for India’s growth trajectory, the Budget proposes
to club software development services, IT enabled services, knowledge process outsourcing
services and contract R&D services relating to software development under a single category of
Information Technology Services with a common safe harbour margin of 15.5 percent. Further,
the threshold for availing safe harbour for IT services will be enhanced from 300 crore rupees to
2,000 crore rupees. Safe harbour for IT services shall be approved by an automated rule-driven
process, and once applied by an IT Services company, the same safe harbour can be continued
for a period of 5 years at a stretch.
Unilateral Advanced Pricing Agreement (APA) process for IT services is proposed to be fast-
tracked with an endeavour to conclude it within two years, which can be extended by 6 months
on taxpayer’s request. Further, the facility of modified returns available to the entity entering
APA is to be extended to its associated entities.
Attracting global business and investment
While presenting the Union Budget 2026-27 in the Parliament today, the Union Finance and
Corporate Affairs Minister said that any foreign company that provides cloud services to
customers globally by using data centre services from India will be provided tax holiday till
2047. She added that a safe harbour of 15 percent on cost is to be provided if the company
providing data centre services from India is a related entity. Moreover, a safe harbour will be
provided to non-residents for component warehousing in a bonded warehouse at a profit margin
of 2 percent of the invoice value. The resultant tax of about 0.7 percent will be much lower than
in competing jurisdictions, the Union Minister said.
The Budget proposes to provide exemption from income tax for 5 years to any non-resident who
provides capital goods, equipment or tooling, to any toll manufacturer in a bonded zone. To
encourage vast pool of global talent to work in India for a longer period of time, exemption will
be provided to global (non-India sourced) income of a non-resident expert, for a stay period of 5
years under notified schemes. Further, all non-residents who pay tax on presumptive basis, will
be exempted from Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT).
Tax Administration
In a significant step towards strengthening tax administration, the Budget proposes the
constitution of a Joint Committee of Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Central Board of Direct
Taxes for incorporating the requirements of Income Computation and Disclosure Standards
(ICDS) in the Indian Accounting Standards (IndAS) itself. Separate accounting requirement
based on ICDS will be done away with from the tax year 2027-28. The definition of accountant
for the purposes of Safe Harbour Rules will also be rationalized.
Other Tax Proposals
In the interest of minority shareholders, the Union Budget 2026-27 proposes that buyback for all
types of shareholders will be taxed as Capital Gains. It requires promoters to pay an additional
buyback tax, making effective tax 22 percent for corporate promoters and 30 percent for non-
corporate promoters.
Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman said that TCS rate for sellers of specific goods namely alcoholic liquor,
scrap and minerals will be rationalized to 2 percent and that on tendu leaves will be reduced from
5 percent to 2 percent. Another notable tax proposal is the move to raise STT on Futures to 0.05
percent from present 0.02 percent. STT on options premium and exercise of options will also be
raised to 0.15 percent from the present rate of 0.1 percent and 0.125 percent, respectively.
To encourage companies to shift to the new regime, the Budget proposes that the set-off of
brought forward MAT credit is to be allowed to companies only in the new regime. Set-off using
available MAT credit will be allowed to an extent of 1/4th of the tax liability in the new regime.
Proposing to make MAT the final tax, Smt. Sitharaman said that there will be no further credit
accumulation from 1st April 2026. The rate of final tax will be reduced to 14 percent from the
current MAT rate of 15 percent. Further, the brought forward MAT credit of taxpayers
accumulated till 31st March 2026, will continue to be available to them for set-off as above.
Indirect Taxes:
The Finance Minister stated that the proposals for Customs and Central Excise aim to further
simplify the tariff structure, support domestic manufacturing, promote export competitiveness,
and correct inversion in duty.
Rationalisation of Custom Duties:
In Marine, Leather, and Textile products, the limit for duty-free imports of specified inputs used
for processing seafood products for export, is to be increased from the current 1 per cent to 3 per
cent of the FOB value. The duty-free imports of specified inputs, which is currently available for
exports of leather or synthetic footwear will be allowed.
In Energy sector, the basic customs duty exemption given to capital goods used for
manufacturing Lithium-Ion Cells for batteries will be extended and the basic customs duty on
import of sodium antimonate for use in manufacture of solar glass will be exempted.
The Finance Minister added that the existing basic customs duty exemption on imports of goods
required for Nuclear Power Projects will be extended till the year 2035 and the basic customs
duty on specified parts used in the manufacture of microwave ovens will be exempted.
The basic customs duty to the import of capital goods required for processing of critical minerals
will be exempted and the entire value of biogas while calculating the Central Excise duty
payable on biogas blended CNG will be excluded.
In the Civil and Defence Aviation sector, the basic customs duty on components and parts
required for the manufacture of civilian, training and other aircrafts will be exempted and the
basic custom duty on raw materials imported for manufacture of parts of aircraft to be used in
maintenance, repair, or overhaul requirements by Units in the Defence sector will be exempted.
Further, a special one-time measure, to facilitate sales by eligible manufacturing units in Special
Economic Zone to the Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) at concessional rates of duty is proposed.
To enhance the Ease of Living, the Finance Minister stated that the tariff rate on all dutiable
goods imported for personal use will be reduced from 20 per cent to 10 per cent. The basic
customs duty on 17 drugs or medicines will be exempted. 7 more rare diseases will be added for
the purposes of exempting import duties on personal imports of drugs, medicines and Food for
Special Medical Purposes (FSMP) used in their treatment.
Custom Processes:
The Custom processes to have minimal intervention for smoother and faster movement of goods.
Further, Duty deferral period for Tier 2 and Tier 3 Authorised Economic Operators, known as
AEOs, is to be enhanced from 15 days to 30 days. Same is extended to the eligible manufacturer-
importers. The Validity period of advance ruling, binding on Customs, is proposed to be
extended from the present 3 years to 5 years. The government agencies will be encouraged to
leverage AEO accreditation for preferential treatment in clearing their cargo.
The Budget also proposes that the Customs warehousing framework is to be transformed into a
warehouse operator-centric system with self-declarations, electronic tracking and risk-based
audit.
Ease of Doing Business:
Multiple initiatives have been taken in the Ease of Doing Business sector. For instance, Cargo
clearance approvals from various Government agencies to be seamlessly processed through a
single and interconnected digital window by the end of the financial year. For goods not having
any compliance requirement, clearance is to be done by Customs immediately after online
registration is completed by the importer. The Customs Integrated System (CIS) is to be rolled
out in 2 years as a single, integrated and scalable platform for all the customs processes. Also,
the Utilization of non-intrusive scanning with advanced imaging and AI technology for risk
assessment is to be expanded in a phased manner with the objective to scan every container
across all the major ports.
The Union Budget 2026-27 makes the Fish catch by an Indian fishing vessel in Exclusive
Economic Zone (EEZ) or on the High Seas free of duty. Landing of such fish on foreign port will
be treated as export of goods. The budget also proposes complete removal of the current value
cap of ₹10 lakh per consignment on courier exports-supports aspirations of India’s small
businesses, artisans and start-ups to access global markets through e-commerce
The Provisions governing baggage clearance are also to be revised during international travel.
Revised rules to enhance duty-free allowances in line with the present day travel realities.
Further, Honest taxpayers, willing to settle disputes will be able close cases by paying an
additional amount in lieu of penalty.
***
NB/SR/SNC/RC/AD/KM/RK
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
*****
HIGHLIGHTS OF UNION BUDGET 2026-27
New Delhi, 1st February 2026
PART-A
Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman tabled the Union
Budget 2026-27 in the parliament today. The highlights of the budget are as follows:
The first Budget prepared in Kartavya Bhawan, is inspired by 3 kartavyas:
4. First kartavya is to accelerate and sustain economic growth, by enhancing productivity
and competitiveness, and building resilience to volatile global dynamics.
5. Second kartavya is to fulfil aspirations of people and build their capacity, making them
strong partners in India’s path to prosperity
6. Third kartavya, aligned with vision of Sabka Sath, Sabka Vikas, is to ensure that every
family, community, region and sector has access to resources, amenities and
opportunities for meaningful participation.
Budget Estimates
 The non-debt receipts and the total expenditure are estimated as ₹36.5 lakh crore and
₹53.5 lakh crore respectively. The Centre’s net tax receipts are estimated at ₹28.7 lakh
crore.
 The gross market borrowings are estimated at ₹17.2 lakh crore and the net market
borrowings from dated securities are estimated at ₹11.7 lakh crore.
o The Revised Estimates of the non-debt receipts are ₹34 lakh crore of which the
Centre’s net tax receipts are ₹26.7 lakh crore.
o The Revised Estimate of the total expenditure is ₹49.6 lakh crore, of which the
capital expenditure is about ₹11 lakh crore.
 The fiscal deficit in BE 2026-27 is estimated to be 4.3 percent of GDP.
 In RE 2025-26, the fiscal deficit has been estimated at par with BE of 2025-26 at 4.4
percent of GDP.
 The debt-to-GDP ratio is estimated to be 55.6 percent of GDP in BE 2026-27, compared
to 56.1 percent of GDP in RE 2025-26.
First Kartavya is to accelerate and sustain economic growth and proposes 6 interventions
1. Scaling up manufacturing in 7 strategic and frontier sectors
i. Biopharma SHAKTI (Strategy for Healthcare Advancement through Knowledge,
Technology and Innovation) announced, with an outlay of ₹ 10,000 crores over the
next 5 years to develop India as a global Biopharma manufacturing hub.
a) A Biopharma-focused network to be created with 3 new National Institutes of
Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER) and upgrading 7 existing ones.
b) A network of over 1000 accredited India Clinical Trials sites to be created
ii. India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) 2.0 to be launched to produce equipment and
materials, design full-stack Indian IP, and fortify supply chains with focus on industry led
research and training centres to develop technology and skilled workforce.
iii. The Electronics Components Manufacturing Scheme outlay increased to ₹40,000
crore.
iv. Dedicated Rare Earth Corridors to be established, to support the mineral-rich States of
Odisha, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu to promote mining, processing, research
and manufacturing.
v. Government to launch a Scheme to support States in establishing 3 dedicated Chemical
Parks, through challenge route, on a cluster-based plug-and-play model.
vi. Strengthening Capital Goods Capability
 Hi-Tech Tool Rooms to be established by CPSEs at 2 locations as digitally enabled
automated service bureaus that locally design, test, and manufacture high-precision
components at scale and at lower cost.
 A Scheme for Enhancement of Construction and Infrastructure Equipment (CIE) to
be introduced, to strengthen domestic manufacturing of high-value and technologically-
advanced CIE.
 A Scheme for Container Manufacturing announced, to create a globally competitive
container manufacturing ecosystem, with a budgetary allocation of over ₹10,000 crore
over a 5 year period.
vii. Integrated Programme for the Textile Sector announced
a) The National Fibre Scheme for self-reliance in natural fibres such as silk, wool and jute,
man-made fibres, and new-age fibres.
b) Textile Expansion and Employment Scheme to modernize traditional clusters with capital
support for machinery, technology upgradation and common testing and certification
centres.
 Mega Textile Parks to be setup in challenge mode with focus on bringing value addition
to technical textiles.
 Mahatma Gandhi Gram Swaraj initiative announced, to strengthen khadi, handloom
and handicrafts.
a) Initiative to help in global market linkage, branding and will streamline and support
training, skilling, quality of process and production.
2. Rejuvenating legacy industrial sectors
 A Scheme to revive 200 legacy industrial clusters announced, to improve their cost
competitiveness and efficiency through infrastructure and technology upgradation.
3. Creating “Champion SMEs” and supporting micro enterprises
 A dedicated ₹10,000 crore SME Growth Fund, to be introduced, to create future
Champions, incentivizing enterprises based on select criteria.
 Self-Reliant India Fund to be allocated with additional ₹2,000 crore, to continue support
to micro enterprises and maintain their access to risk capital.
 Government to facilitate Professional Institutions such as ICAI, ICSI, ICMAI to design
short-term, modular courses and practical tools to develop a cadre of ‘Corporate Mitras’,
especially in Tier-II and Tier-III towns.
4. Delivering a powerful push to Infrastructure
 Public capital expenditure to be increased to ₹12.2 lakh crore in FY 2026-27.
 Government to set up an Infrastructure Risk Guarantee Fund to strengthen the
confidence of private developers regarding risks during infrastructure development and
construction phase.
 Government to accelerate recycling of significant real estate assets of CPSEs through
the setting up of dedicated REITs.
 To promote environmentally sustainable movement of cargo, following measures are
proposed:
a) New Dedicated Freight Corridors to be established connecting Dankuni in the East, to
Surat in the West
b) 20 new National Waterways (NW) to be operationalised over next 5 years, starting
with NW-5 in Odisha to connect mineral rich areas of Talcher and Angul and industrial
centres like Kalinga Nagar to the Ports of Paradeep and Dhamra.
o Training Institutes to be set up as Regional Centres of Excellence for
development of the required manpower.
o Further, a ship repair ecosystem catering to inland waterways to be set up at
Varanasi and Patna
c) A Coastal Cargo Promotion Scheme to be launched for incentivising a modal shift
from rail and road, to increase the share of inland waterways and coastal shipping from
6% to 12 % by 2047.
 Incentives to be provided to indigenize manufacturing of seaplanes and enhance last-
mile and remote connectivity, and promote tourism.
a) Seaplane VGF Scheme to be introduced to provide support for operations.
5. Ensuring long term energy security and stability
 An outlay of ₹20,000 crore over the next 5 years, announced for Carbon Capture
Utilization and Storage (CCUS) technologies.
6. Developing City Economic Regions
 An allocation of ₹5000 crore over 5 years, per city economic regions (CER) announced,
for implementing their plans through a challenge mode with a reform-cum-results based
financing mechanism.
 Government to develop Seven High-Speed Rail corridors between cities as ‘growth
connectors’ to promote environmentally sustainable passenger systems. These include:
i) Mumbai-Pune
ii) Pune-Hyderabad,
iii) Hyderabad-Bengaluru,
iv) Hyderabad-Chennai
v) Chennai-Bengaluru,
vi) Delhi-Varanasi,
vii) Varanasi-Siliguri.
 Government to setup a “High Level Committee on Banking for Viksit Bharat”, to
comprehensively review the sector and align it with India’s next phase of growth, while
safeguarding financial stability, inclusion and consumer protection.
 Government to restructure the Power Finance Corporation and Rural
Electrification Corporation to achieve scale and improve efficiency in the Public Sector
NBFCs.
 A comprehensive review of the Foreign Exchange Management (Non-debt
Instruments) Rules is proposed, to create a more contemporary, user-friendly
framework for foreign investments, consistent with India’s evolving economic priorities.
Municipal Bonds
 An incentive of ₹100 crore for a single bond issuance of more than ₹1000 crore
announced, to encourage the issuance of municipal bonds of higher value by large cities.
Second Kartavya is to fulfil aspirations and build capacity of people
 Government to set up a High-Powered ‘Education to Employment and Enterprise’
Standing Committee to recommend measures that focus on the Services Sector as a core
driver of Viksit Bharat.
Creation of Professionals for Viksit Bharat
 Existing institutions for Allied Health Professionals (AHPs) to be upgraded and new
AHP Institutions to be established in private and Government sectors
a) 100,000 Allied Health Professionals to be added over the next 5 years
 Five Regional Medical Hubs to be established, to promote India as a hub for medical
tourism services.
AYUSH
 3 new All India Institutes of Ayurveda to be established
.
Animal Husbandry
 Government to scale up availability of veterinary professionals by more than 20,000
a) A loan-linked capital subsidy support scheme to be launched for establishment of
veterinary and para vet colleges, veterinary hospitals, diagnostic laboratories and
breeding facilities in the private sector.
Orange Economy
 Indian Institute of Creative Technologies, Mumbai to be provided support in setting up ,
Visual Effects, Gaming and Comics (AVGC) Content Creator Labs in 15,000 secondary
schools and 500 colleges.
Education
 5 University Townships to be created in the vicinity of major industrial and logistic
corridors through challenge route.
a) Through VGF/capital support, 1 girls’ hostel to be established in every district
Tourism
 National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology to be upgraded to
National Institute of Hospitality
a) A pilot scheme for upskilling 10,000 guides in 20 tourist sites announced through a
standardized, high-quality 12-week training course in hybrid mode In collaboration with
an IIM.
b) A National Destination Digital Knowledge Grid to be established to digitally document
all places of significance—cultural, spiritual andheritage.
.
Heritage and Culture Tourism
 15 archeological sites including Lothal, Dholavira, Rakhigarhi, Adichanallur, Sarnath,
Hastinapur, and Leh Palace to be developed into vibrant, experiential cultural
destinations
Sports
 Khelo India Mission to be launched to transform the Sports sector over the next decade.
Third Kartavya is aligned with vision of Sabka Sath, Sabka Vikas and requires targeted
efforts in the following four areas:
1. Increasing Farmer Incomes
 New Initiatives to be undertaken for
a) Integrated development of 500 reservoirs and Amrit Sarovars
High Value Agriculture:
 Govt. to support high value crops such as :
a) coconut, sandalwood, cocoa and cashew in coastal areas
b) Coconut Promotion Scheme to be launched to increase production and enhance
productivity.
Bharat-VISTAAR (Virtually Integrated System to Access Agricultural Resources)
 Government to launch Bharat-VISTAAR, a multilingual AI tool to integrate the
AgriStack portals and the ICAR package on agricultural practices with AI systems.
2. Empowering Divyangjan
 Divyangjan Kaushal Yojana for Divyangjans to offer task-oriented and process-driven
roles in IT, AVGC sectors, Hospitality and Food and Beverages sectors.
3. Commitment to Mental Health and Trauma Care
 Government to set up NIMHANS-2 in north India.
a) Government to upgrade National Mental Health Institutes in Ranchi and Tezpur as
Regional Apex Institutions.
4. Focus on the Purvodaya States and the North-Eastern Region
 Government to develop an integrated East Coast Industrial Corridor with a well-
connected node at Durgapur, creation of 5 tourism destinations in the 5 Purvodaya States,
and the provision of 4,000 e-buses.
a) A scheme to be launched for the development of Buddhist Circuits in Arunachal
Pradesh, Sikkim, Assam, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura.
16th Finance Commission
 Government provided ₹1.4 lakh crore to the States for the FY 2026-27 as Finance
Commission Grants as recommended by the 16th Finance Commission.
PART –B
Direct Taxes
New Income Tax Act
 New Income tax Act ,2025 to come into effect from April 2026
 The simplified Income Tax Rules and Forms will be notified shortly. The forms
redesigned for easy compliance of ordinary citizens.
Ease of Living
 Interest awarded by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal to a natural person will be
exempt from Income Tax, and any TDS on this account will be done away with.
 TCS Rationalization
 Reduce TCS rate on sale of overseas tour program package to 2 % (from current 2-20%).
 Reduce the TCS rate to 2% (from current 5%) for LRS remittances for education and
medical.
 Simplified TDS provisions for manpower supply will benefit labour intensive business.
 Scheme for small taxpayers wherein a rule based automated process for obtaining Lower
or nil deduction certificate instead of filing application with the assessor.
 Single window filing with depositories for Form 15G or 15 H for TDS on dividends,
interests etc
 Extend time available for revising returns from 31st December to upto 31st March with
payment of nominal fees
 The timeline for filing of tax returns to be staggered .
 TAN for property transactions involving NRIs will be replaced with resident buyers PAN
based challan.
 A one time 6 month foreign asset disclosure scheme for small taxpayers to disclose their
overseas income or asset.
Rationalizing Penalty and Prosecution
 IT assessment & penalty proceedings are proposed to be integrated by way of common
order for both.
 Taxpayers allowed to update their returns even after reassessment proceedings have been
initiated to reduce litigations, at an additional 10 percent tax rate over and above the rate
applicable for the relevant year.
 Penalty for misreporting of income also eligible for immunity with payment of additional
income tax.
 Prosecution framework under the Income Tax Act to be rationalized.
 Non-production of books of account and documents, and requirement of TDS payment,
where payment is made in kind, to be decriminalised.
 Non-disclosure of non-immovable foreign assets with aggregate value less than 20 lakh
rupees to be provided with immunity from prosecution with retrospective effect from
1.10.2024.
Cooperatives
 Extend deduction already allowed to a primary cooperative society engaged in supplying
milk, oilseeds, fruits or vegetables raised or grown by its members to those supplying
cattle feed and cotton seed also.
 Allow the inter-cooperative society dividend income as deduction under the new tax
regime to the extent it is further distributed to its members.
 Exemption for a period of 3 years allowed to dividend income received by a notified
national cooperative federation, on their investments made in companies up to 31.1.2026,
for dividends further distributed to its member co-operatives.
Supporting IT sector as India’s growth engine
 Software development services, IT enabled services, knowledge process outsourcing
services and contract R&D services relating to software development to be clubbed under
a single category of Information Technology Services with a common safe harbour
margin of 15.5 percent.
 The threshold for availing safe harbour for IT services to be enhanced from 300 crore
rupees to 2,000 crore rupees.
 Safe harbour for IT services shall be approved by an automated rule-driven process, can
be continued for a period of 5 years at a stretch.
 Unilateral Advanced Pricing Agreement (APA) process for IT services to be fast-tracked
with the endeavour to conclude it within a period of 2 years, which can be extended by 6
months on taxpayer’s request.
 The facility of modified returns available to the entity entering APA to be extended to its
associated entities.
Attracting global business and investment
 Any foreign company that provides cloud services to customers globally by using data
centre services from India to be provided Tax holiday till 2047
 A safe harbour of 15 percent on cost to be provided if the company providing data centre
services from India is a related entity.
 A safe harbour to non-residents for component warehousing in a bonded warehouse at a
profit margin of 2 percent of the invoice value. The resultant tax of about 0.7 percent will
be much lower than in competing jurisdictions.
 Exemption from income tax for 5 years to be provided to any non-resident who provides
capital goods, equipment or tooling, to any toll manufacturer in a bonded zone.
 Exemption to global (non-India sourced) income of a non-resident expert, for a stay
period of 5 years under notified schemes
 Exemption from Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) to all non-residents who pay tax on
presumptive basis.
Tax administration
 A Joint Committee of Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Central Board of Direct Taxes to
be constituted for incorporating the requirements of Income Computation and Disclosure
Standards (ICDS) in the Indian Accounting Standards (IndAS) itself. Separate accounting
requirement based on ICDS will be done away with from the tax year 2027-28.
 Definition of accountant for the purposes of Safe Harbour Rules to be rationalized.
Other Tax proposals
 In the interest of minority shareholders, buyback for all types of shareholders to be taxed
as Capital Gains. Promoters to pay an additional buyback tax, making effective tax 22
percent for corporate promoters and 30 percent for non-corporate promoters.
 TCS rate for sellers of specific goods namely alcoholic liquor, scrap and minerals will be
rationalized to 2 percent and that on tendu leaves will be reduced from 5 percent to 2
percent.
 STT on Futures to be raised to 0.05 percent from present 0.02 percent. STT on options
premium and exercise of options to be raised to 0.15 percent from the present rate of 0.1
percent and 0.125 percent respectively.
 To encourage companies to shift to the new regime, set-off of brought forward MAT
credit to be allowed to companies only in the new regime. Set-off using available MAT
credit to be allowed to an extent of 1/4th of the tax liability in the new regime.
 MAT is proposed to be made final tax. There will be no further credit accumulation from
1st April 2026. The rate of final tax to be reduced to 14 percent from the current MAT
rate of 15 percent. The brought forward MAT credit of taxpayers accumulated till 31st
March 2026, will continue to be available to them for set-off as above.
Indirect taxes:
Tariff Simplification
Marine, leather, and textile products:
 The limit for duty-free imports of specified inputs used for processing seafood products
for export, to increase from the current 1 per cent to 3 per cent of the FOB value.
 The duty-free imports of specified inputs, which is currently available for exports of
leather or synthetic footwear to be allowed.
Energy transition and security:
 The basic customs duty exemption given to capital goods used for manufacturing
Lithium-Ion Cells for batteries to be extended.
 The basic customs duty on import of sodium antimonate for use in manufacture of solar
glass to be exempted.
Nuclear Power:
 The existing basic customs duty exemption on imports of goods required for Nuclear
Power Projects to be extended till the year 2035.
Critical Minerals:
 The basic customs duty to the import of capital goods required for processing of critical
minerals to be exempted.
Biogas blended CNG:
 The entire value of biogas while calculating the Central Excise duty payable on biogas
blended CNG to be excluded.
Civil and Defence Aviation:
 The basic customs duty on components and parts required for the manufacture of civilian,
training and other aircrafts to be exempted.
 The basic custom duty on raw materials imported for manufacture of parts of aircraft to
be used in maintenance, repair, or overhaul requirements by Units in the Defence sector
to be exempted.
Electronics:
 The basic customs duty on specified parts used in the manufacture of microwave ovens to
be exempted.
Special Economic Zone:
 A special one-time measure, to facilitate sales by eligible manufacturing units in SEZs to
the Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) at concessional rates of duty is proposed. The quantity
of such sales will be limited to a prescribed proportion of their exports.
Ease of Living:
 The tariff rate on all dutiable goods imported for personal use to be reduced from 20 per
cent to 10 per cent.
 The basic customs duty on 17 drugs/ medicines is to be exempted.
 Duty free personal import of drugs/ medicines and food for 7 more rare diseases.
Customs Process simplification
 Custom processes to have minimal intervention for smoother and faster movement of
goods.
Trust-based systems
 Duty deferral period for Tier 2 and Tier 3 Authorised Economic Operators, known as
AEOs, to be enhanced from 15 days to 30 days. Same is extended to the eligible
manufacturer-importers
 Validity period of advance ruling, binding on Customs, to be extended from the present 3
years to 5 years.
 Government agencies will be encouraged to leverage AEO accreditation for preferential
treatment in clearing their cargo.
 Filing of bill of entry by a trusted importer, and arrival of goods will automatically notify
Customs for completing their clearance formalities (for import of goods not needing any
compliance).
 The Customs warehousing framework to be transformed into a warehouse operator-
centric system with self-declarations, electronic tracking and risk-based audit.
Ease of Doing Business
 Cargo clearance approvals from various Government agencies to be seamlessly processed
through a single and interconnected digital window by the end of the financial year.
 Processes involved in clearance of food, drugs, plant, animal & wild life products,
accounting for around 70 percent of interdicted cargo, to be operationalised on this
system by April 2026 itself.
 For goods not having any compliance requirement, clearance to be done by Customs
immediately after online registration is completed by the importer.
 Customs Integrated System (CIS) to be rolled out in 2 years as a single, integrated and
scalable platform for all the customs processes.
 Utilization of non-intrusive scanning with advanced imaging and AI technology for risk
assessment to be expanded in a phased manner with the objective to scan every container
across all the major ports.
New export opportunities
 Fish catch by an Indian fishing vessel in Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) or on the High
Seas to be made free of duty, Landing of such fish on foreign port will be treated as
export of goods.
 Complete removal of the current value cap of ₹10 lakh per consignment on courier
exports-supports aspirations of India’s small businesses, artisans and start-ups to access
global markets through e-commerce
Ease of Living
 Provisions governing baggage clearance to be revised during international travel.
Revised rules to enhance duty-free allowances in line with the present day travel
realities.
 Honest taxpayers, willing to settle disputes will be able close cases by paying an
additional amount in lieu of penalty.
***
NB/SR/SNC/RC/AD/CNAN/RK/AK
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
*******
UNION BUDGET 2026-27 FOCUSES ON 3 KARTAVYAS OF
SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC GROWTH, CAPACITY BUILDING AND
SABKA SATH, SABKA VIKAS
BUDGET 2026-27 IS A UNIQUE YUVA SHAKTI-DRIVEN BUDGET:
FINANCE MINISTER
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
Union Minister of Finance & Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman while
presenting the Union Budget 2026-2027 in Parliament today, proposed 3 kartavyas
to speed-up the reform momentum towards Viksit Bharat. The Finance Minister
said that the first Kartavya is to accelerate and sustain economic growth, by
enhancing productivity and competitiveness, and building resilience to volatile
global dynamics; second Kartavya is to fulfill aspirations of people and build their
capacity, making them strong partners in India’s path to prosperity and third
Kartavya, aligned with vision of Sabka Sath, Sabka Vikas, is to ensure that every
family, community, region and sector has access to resources, amenities and
opportunities for meaningful participation.
The Finance Minister said that the threefold approach requires a supportive
ecosystem. The first requirement is to sustain the momentum of structural
reforms— continuous, adaptive, and forward-looking. Second, a robust and
resilient financial sector is central to mobilising savings, allocating capital
efficiently and managing risks. Third, cutting-edge technologies, including AI
applications, can serve as force multipliers for better governance.
Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman said that the first Budget prepared in Kartavya Bhawan is
a unique Yuva Shakti-driven Budget inspired from several innovative ideas which
were shared with Hon’ble Prime Minister in the Viksit Bharat Young Leaders
Dialogue 2026.
The Finance Minister said that India’s economic trajectory has been marked by
stability, fiscal discipline, sustained growth and moderate inflation in last 12 years.
The Government has continuously pursued far reaching structural reforms, fiscal
prudence and monetary stability whilst maintaining a strong thrust on public
investment. She said that keeping ‘self-reliance (Atamnirbharta) at core,
Government has built domestic manufacturing capacity, energy security and
reduced critical import dependencies along with ensuring citizens centric
development and undertaking reforms to support employment generation,
agricultural productivity, household purchasing power and universal services to
people. These measures have delivered a high growth rate of around 7% and
helped us make substantial strides in poverty reduction and improvement in the
lives of people, she said.
Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman said that in an external environment in which trade and
multilateralism are imperiled and access to resources and supply chains are
disrupted, new technologies are transforming production systems while sharply
increasing demands on water, energy and critical minerals; India will continue to
take confident steps towards Viksit Bharat by balancing ambition with inclusion
and must remain deeply integrated with global markets, exporting more and
attracting stable long-term investment. The Finance Minister expressed the
gratitude to the people for standing firmly with Government and forging the way
together towards becoming one of the largest economies of the world.
Highlighting Government’s aim to transform aspiration into achievement and
potential into performance, the Finance Minister said that Government is ensuring
that dividends of growth reach every farmer, the scheduled caste, the scheduled
tribes, the nomads, the youth, the poor and the women.
The Finance Minister said that the Government has undertaken comprehensive
economic reforms towards creating employment, boosting productivity and
accelerating growth. She said that after the Prime Minister’s announcement on
Independence Day in 2025, over 350 reforms have been rolled out. These include
GST simplification, notification of Labour Codes, and rationalisation of mandatory
Quality Control Orders. High Level Committees have been formed and in parallel,
the Central Government is working with the State Governments on deregulation
and reducing compliance requirements. She said that this Reform Express is well
on its way and will maintain its momentum to fulfil the Kartavya.
Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman proposed interventions in six areas under the first
Kartavya to accelerate and sustain economic growth i) Scaling up manufacturing in
7 strategic and frontier sectors; ii) Rejuvenating legacy industrial sectors; iii)
Creating “Champion MSMEs”; iv) Delivering a powerful push to Infrastructure; v)
Ensuring long-term energy security and stability; and vi) Developing City
Economic Regions.
The Finance Minister said that second Kartavya is to fulfil aspirations and build
capacity. She said that close to 25 crore individuals have come out of
multidimensional poverty through a decade of our Government’s sustained and
reform-oriented efforts. She highlighted that Government has decided to place a
renewed emphasis on the Services Sector to provide a pathway to fulfilling
aspirations of a youthful India, with measures like setting up a High-Powered
‘Education to Employment and Enterprise’ Standing Committee to recommend
measures that focus on the Services Sector as a core driver of Viksit Bharat. The
Committee will prioritise areas to optimise the potential for growth, employment
and exports. They will also assess the impact of emerging technologies, including
AI, on jobs and skill requirements and propose measures thereof. This will make
India a global leader in services, with a 10% global share by 2047, she said.
Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman proposed that the third Kartavya which aligns with
vision of Sabka Sath, Sabka Vikas requires targeted efforts for a) Increasing farmer
incomes through productivity enhancement and entrepreneurship, with special
attention to small and marginal farmers; b) Empowering Divyangjan through
access to livelihood opportunities, training and high-quality assistive devices; c)
Empowering the vulnerable to access mental health and trauma care; d) Focus on
the Purvodaya States and the North-East Region to accelerate development and
employment opportunities.
****
NB/AK
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
****
Union Budget 2026-27 lays emphasis on Scaling up manufacturing in 7 strategic and
frontier sectors
To develop India as a global Biopharma manufacturing hub, the Budget proposes
Biopharma SHAKTI with an outlay of ₹ 10,000 crores over next 5 years
India Semiconductor Mission 2.0 announced to produce equipment and materials, design
full-stack Indian IP, and fortify supply chains
For Electronics Components Manufacturing Scheme, the Union Budget proposes to
increase the outlay to ₹40,000 crore
To support mineral-rich States of Odisha, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu,
dedicated Rare Earth Corridors to be established to promote mining, processing, research
and manufacturing
A Scheme proposed to support States in establishing 3 dedicated Chemical Parks, through
challenge route, on a cluster-based plug-and-play model
Budget proposes a Scheme for Container Manufacturing to create a globally competitive
container manufacturing ecosystem with a budgetary allocation of ₹10,000 crore over a 5
year period
An Integrated Programme with 5 components for development of textile sector announced
Mega Textile Parks to be set up in challenge mode
“Mahatma Gandhi Gram Swaraj” initiative to strengthen khadi, handloom and
handicrafts and to help in global market linkage and branding
A dedicated initiative for sports goods to promote manufacturing, research and innovation
in equipment design as well as material sciences
1ST February, 2026
The Union Budget 2026-27 lays emphasis on Scaling up manufacturing in 7 strategic and
frontier sectors. While presenting the Union Budget 2026-27 in Parliament today, Union
Minister of Finance & Corporate Affairs Smt Nirmala Sitharaman said that the proposed
interventions forms part of six areas under ‘First Kartavya’ in the Budget.
To develop India as a global Biopharma manufacturing hub, the Budget proposes Biopharma
SHAKTI with an outlay of ₹ 10,000 crores over the next 5 years. This will build the ecosystem
for domestic production of biologics and biosimilars. The Strategy as envisaged in the Budget
will include a Biopharma-focused network with 3 new National Institutes of Pharmaceutical
Education and Research (NIPER) and upgrading 7 existing ones. It will also create a network of
over 1000 accredited India Clinical Trials sites. The Union Budget proposes to strengthen the
Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation to meet global standards and approval timeframes
through a dedicated scientific review cadre and specialists.
For expanding India’s semiconductor sector capabilities and building on India Semiconductor
Mission (ISM) 1.0, the Union Budget proposes to launch ISM 2.0 to produce equipment and
materials, design fullstack Indian IP, and fortify supply chains. Smt Sitharaman said that the
focus will be on industry-led research and training centres to develop technology and skilled
workforce.
The Electronics Components Manufacturing Scheme, launched in April 2025 has an outlay of
₹22,919 crore. The Union Budget 2026-27 proposes to increase the outlay to ₹40,000 crore to
capitalise on the momentum.
On a Scheme for Rare Earth Permanent Magnets, the Union Budget proposes to support the
mineral-rich States of Odisha, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu for establishing
dedicated Rare Earth Corridors to promote mining, processing, research and manufacturing.
To enhance domestic chemical production and reduce import-dependency, the Union Minister
proposed to launch a Scheme to support States in establishing 3 dedicated Chemical Parks,
through challenge route, on a cluster-based plug-and-play model.
In her Budget speech, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman stated that Strong capital goods capability is a
determinant of productivity and quality across different sectors. Towards building this capacity,
the Union Budget proposes Hi-Tech Tool Rooms to be established by CPSEs at 2 locations as
digitally enabled automated service bureaus that locally design, test, and manufacture high-
precision components at scale and at lower cost. A Scheme for Enhancement of Construction and
Infrastructure Equipment (CIE) will be introduced to strengthen domestic manufacturing of high-
value and technologically-advanced CIE. This can range from lifts in a multi-story apartment,
fire-fighting equipment, large and small, to tunnel-boring equipment for building metros and
high-altitude roads. The Budget also proposes a Scheme for Container Manufacturing to create a
globally competitive container manufacturing ecosystem, with a budgetary allocation of ₹10,000
crore over a 5 year period.
For the labour-intensive Textile Sector, it proposes that an Integrated Programme with 5 sub-
parts; firstly, the National Fibre Scheme for self-reliance in natural fibres such as silk, wool and
jute, man-made fibres, and new-age fibres; secondly, Textile Expansion and Employment
Scheme to modernise traditional clusters with capital support for machinery, technology
upgradation and common testing and certification centres; thirdly, a National Handloom and
Handicraft programme to integrate and strengthen existing schemes and ensure targeted support
for weavers and artisans; fourthly, Tex-Eco Initiative to promote globally competitive and
sustainable textiles and apparels; fifthly, Samarth 2.0 to modernize and upgrade the textile
skilling ecosystem through collaboration with industry and academic institutions.
With a focus on bringing value addition to technical textiles, the Union Budget proposes to set
up Mega Textile Parks in challenge mode.
Further the Union Budget proposes to launch the Mahatma Gandhi Gram Swaraj initiative to
strengthen khadi, handloom and handicrafts. This will help in global market linkage and
branding. The budget specifies that it will streamline and support training, skilling, quality of
process and production. This will benefit our weavers, village industries, One - District – One -
Product initiative and rural youth, the Budget added.
During the presentation of the budget, Smt Sitharaman said that India has the potential to emerge
as a global hub for high quality, affordable sports goods. In this endeavour, the Budget proposes
a dedicated initiative for sports goods that will promote manufacturing, research and innovation
in equipment design as well as material sciences.
***
NB/SB/P
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
******
BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR CUSTOMS AND CENTRAL EXCISE AIM TO
FURTHER SIMPLIFY TARIFF STRUCTURE, SUPPORT DOMESTIC
MANUFACTURING: UNION FINANCE MINISTER
UNION BUDGET 2026-27 PROPOSES SEVERAL BASIC CUSTOMS DUTY
EXEMPTIONS TO ENSURE ENERGY TRANSITION AND SECURITY
BCD EXEMPTIONS PROPOSED FOR MANUFACTURE AND MRO
REQUIREMENTS IN CIVIL AND DEFENCE AVIATION
BUDGET PROPOSES FACILITATING SALES BY ELIGIBLE MANUFACTURING
UNITS IN SEZs TO DOMESTIC TARIFF AREA AT CONCESSIONAL RATES
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
The Budget proposals for Customs and Central Excise aim to further simplify the tariff
structure, support domestic manufacturing, promote export competitiveness, and correct
inversion in duty, said Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs Smt. Nirmala
Sitharaman while presenting the Union Budget 2026-27, in Parliament today.
Taking forward the weeding out of long continuing customs duty exemptions, the Budget
proposes to remove certain exemptions on items which are being manufactured in India or
where the imports are negligible. Similarly, to further simplify the process of ascertaining the
rate of duty applicable on a particular item, the Budget proposes to incorporate certain
effective rates in various customs notifications to the tariff schedule itself.
With an aim to promote exports, the Finance Minister Smt Nirmala Sitharaman
recommended to increase the limit for duty-free imports of specified inputs used for
processing seafood products for export, from the current 1 per cent to 3 per cent of the FOB
value of the previous year’s export turnover. The Budget also proposes to allow duty-free
imports of specified inputs, which is currently available for exports of leather or synthetic
footwear, to exports of Shoe Uppers as well. Fianance Minister also proposed to extend the
time period for export of final product from the existing 6 months to 1 year, for exporters of
leather or textile garments, leather or synthetic footwear and other leather products.
The Budget carries several proposals to ensure energy transition and security. Firstly, the
Budget proposes to extend the basic customs duty exemption given to capital goods used for
manufacturing Lithium-Ion Cells for batteries, to those used for manufacturing Lithium-Ion
Cells for battery energy storage systems too. With respect to solar energy, Finance Minister
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
******
BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR CUSTOMS AND CENTRAL EXCISE AIM TO FURTHER
SIMPLIFY TARIFF STRUCTURE, SUPPORT DOMESTIC MANUFACTURING:
UNION FINANCE MINISTER
UNION BUDGET 2026-27 PROPOSES SEVERAL BASIC CUSTOMS DUTY
EXEMPTIONS TO ENSURE ENERGY TRANSITION AND SECURITY
BCD EXEMPTIONS PROPOSED FOR MANUFACTURE AND MRO REQUIREMENTS
IN CIVIL AND DEFENCE AVIATION
BUDGET PROPOSES FACILITATING SALES BY ELIGIBLE MANUFACTURING
UNITS IN SEZs TO DOMESTIC TARIFF AREA AT CONCESSIONAL RATES
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
The Budget proposals for Customs and Central Excise aim to further simplify the tariff structure,
support domestic manufacturing, promote export competitiveness, and correct inversion in duty,
said Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman while
presenting the Union Budget 2026-27, in Parliament today.
Taking forward the weeding out of long continuing customs duty exemptions, the Budget
proposes to remove certain exemptions on items which are being manufactured in India or where
the imports are negligible. Similarly, to further simplify the process of ascertaining the rate of
duty applicable on a particular item, the Budget proposes to incorporate certain effective rates in
various customs notifications to the tariff schedule itself.
With an aim to promote exports, the Finance Minister Smt Nirmala Sitharaman recommended to
increase the limit for duty-free imports of specified inputs used for processing seafood products
for export, from the current 1 per cent to 3 per cent of the FOB value of the previous year’s
export turnover. The Budget also proposes to allow duty-free imports of specified inputs, which
is currently available for exports of leather or synthetic footwear, to exports of Shoe Uppers as
well. Fianance Minister also proposed to extend the time period for export of final product from
the existing 6 months to 1 year, for exporters of leather or textile garments, leather or synthetic
footwear and other leather products.
The Budget carries several proposals to ensure energy transition and security. Firstly, the Budget
proposes to extend the basic customs duty exemption given to capital goods used for
manufacturing Lithium-Ion Cells for batteries, to those used for manufacturing Lithium-Ion Cells
for battery energy storage systems too. With respect to solar energy, Finance Minister proposed
to exempt basic customs duty on import of sodium antimonate for use in manufacture of solar
glass.
Giving a push to the Nuclear Energy sector, Smt Nirmala Sitharaman recommended extension of
the existing basic customs duty exemption on imports of goods required for Nuclear Power
Projects till the year 2035 and expand it for all nuclear plants irrespective of their capacity. The
Budget also proposes to provide basic customs duty exemption to the import of capital goods
required for processing of critical minerals in India. To promote biogas blending in CNG, the
Budget proposes to exclude the entire value of biogas while calculating the Central Excise duty
payable on biogas blended CNG.
Finance Minister also proposed exemption of basic customs duty on components and parts
required for the manufacture of civilian, training and other aircrafts. The Budget also proposes to
exempt basic customs duty on raw materials imported for manufacture of parts of aircraft to be
used in maintenance, repair, or overhaul requirements by Units in the Defence sector.
To deepen value addition in the consumer electronics sector, the Budget proposes to exempt
basic customs duty on specified parts used in the manufacture of microwave ovens.
The Budget addresses the concerns arising about utilization of capacities by manufacturing units
in the Special Economic Zones due to global trade disruptions. For this, the Finance Minister
proposed to facilitate sales by eligible manufacturing units in SEZs to the Domestic Tariff Area
(DTA) at concessional rates of duty as a special one-time measure. The quantity of such sales
will be limited to a prescribed proportion of their exports. Smt Nirmala Sitharaman said that
necessary regulatory changes will be undertaken to operationalise these measures while ensuring
level-playing field for the units working in the DTA.
******
NB/AK/VM/ST
BIOPHARMA SHAKTI (STRATEGY FOR HEALTHCARE ADVANCEMENT
THROUGH KNOWLEDGE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION) PROPOSED IN
THE UNION BBUDGET 2026-27
EXISTING ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONALS (AHPs) INSTITUTIONS TO BE
UPGRADED AND 100,000 NEW AHPs TO BE ADDED OVER THE NEXT 5 YEARS
CARE ECOSYSTEM FOR GERIATRIC AND ALLIED CARE SERVICES TO BE
BUILT, 1.5 LAKH CAREGIVERS TO BE TRAINED IN COMING YEARS
SCHEME TO SUPPORT STATES IN ESTABLISHING FIVE REGIONAL MEDICAL
HUBS IN PARTNERSHIP WITH THE PRIVATE SECTOR PROPOSED
3 NEW ALL INDIA INSTITUTES OF AYURVEDA TO BE SET UP
AYUSH PHARMACIES AND DRUG TESTING LABS TO BE UPGRADED
THE WHO GLOBAL TRADITIONAL MEDICINE CENTRE IN JAMNAGAR TO BE
UPGRADED
NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH INSTITUTES IN RANCHI AND TEZPUR TO BE
UPGRADED AS REGIONAL APEX INSTITUTIONS
EMERGENCY AND TRAUMA CARE CENTRES TO BE ESTABLISHED TO
INCREASE THE EMERGENCY CAPACITY OF DISTRICT HOSPITALS BY 50%
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
The Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, presented the
Union Budget 2026-27 in Parliament today. In her speech, the Finance Minister said that the
government is inspired by 3 Kartavyas: (1) to accelerate and sustain economic growth; (2) to
fulfill aspirations and build the capacity of the population; (3) to ensure that every family,
community, region and sector has access to resources. Health emerges as an important
component of all the three Kartavyas in the Union Budget.
To develop India as a global Biopharma manufacturing hub, the Union Budget proposes the
Biopharma SHAKTI (Strategy For Healthcare Advancement Through Knowledge, Technology
And Innovation) with an outlay of ₹ 10,000 crores over the next 5 years. This will build the
ecosystem for domestic production of biologics and biosimilars.
For the creation of a new range of skilled career pathways for the youth, the Finance Minister
proposed interventions in multiple sectors including the Health sector. These are as follows:
(1) Existing institutions for Allied Health Professionals (AHPs) will be upgraded and new AHP
Institutions established in private and Government sectors. This will cover 10 selected
disciplines, including optometry, radiology, anesthesia, OT Technology, Applied Psychology
and Behavioural Health and the addition of 100,000 AHPs over the next 5 years.
(2) The Finance Minister in her speech stated that a strong Care Ecosystem, covering geriatric
and allied care services will be built. A variety of NSQF-aligned programmes will be developed
to train multi-skilled caregivers combining core care and allied skills, such as, wellness, yoga
and operation of medical and assistive devices. Further, in the coming year, 1.5 lakh caregivers
will be trained.
(3) To promote India as a hub for medical tourism services, the Union Budget proposes to launch
a Scheme to support States in establishing five Regional Medical Hubs, in partnership with the
private sector. These Hubs will serve as integrated healthcare complexes that combine medical,
educational and research facilities. They will have AYUSH Centres, Medical Value Tourism
Facilitation Centres and infrastructure for diagnostics, post-care and rehabilitation. These Hubs
will provide diverse job opportunities for health professionals including doctors and AHPs.
The Finance Minister, in her speech noted that the Ancient Indian yoga, already respected in
several parts of the world, was given mass global recognition when Hon’ble PM took it to the
UN. Further, post-COVID, Ayurveda gained a similar global acceptance and recognition. To
meet this growing global demand, a few more steps were announced.
The Finance Minister proposed to: (i) set up 3 new All India Institutes of Ayurveda; (ii) upgrade
AYUSH pharmacies and Drug Testing Labs for higher standards of certification ecosystem, and
make available more skilled personnel; (iii) upgrade the WHO Global Traditional Medicine
Centre in Jamnagar to bolster evidence-based research, training and awareness for traditional
medicine.
The Finance Minister also noted the lack of national institutes for mental healthcare in north
India. Therefore, the Union Budget announced the setting up of a NIMHANS-2 and the
upgrading of National Mental Health Institutes in Ranchi and Tezpur as Regional Apex
Institutions. Further, the emergency capacities of District Hospitals will be strengthened and
increased by 50% by establishing Emergency and Trauma Care Centres.
NB/VM/BJK
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
TARIFF RATE ON ALL DUTIABLE GOODS IMPORTED FOR PERSONAL USE TO
BE REDUCED FROM 20% TO 10%
BASIC CUSTOMS DUTY TO BE EXEMPTED ON 17 DRUGS OR MEDICINES FOR
PATIENTS,PARTICULARLYCANCER-PATIENTS
SEVENMORERAREDISEASES TO BE ADDED FORTHEPURPOSESOF
EXEMPTING IMPORT DUTIES ON PERSONAL IMPORTS OF DRUGS AND FSMP
DUTYDEFERRALPERIODFOR TIER 2 &TIER 3 AUTHORISED ECONOMIC
OPERATORS (AEOS) TO BE ENHANCED FROM 15 DAYS TO 30 DAYS
EXPORT CARGO USING ELECTRONICSEALING TO
BEPROVIDEDTHROUGHCLEARANCEFROMTHEFACTORY PREMISES TO THE
SHIP
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
The Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, while
presenting the Union Budget2026-27 today in the Parliament, announcedthat the proposals
for Customs and Central Excise aim to further simplify the tariff structure, support domestic
manufacturing, promote export competitiveness, and correct inversion in duty.
EaseofLiving
The Union Budgetproposes to reduce the tariff rate on all dutiable goods imported for
personal use from 20 per cent to 10 per cent
torationalizethecustomsdutystructure.Toproviderelieftopatients,particularlythosesufferingfro
m cancer, the Budgetproposes to exempt basic customs duty on 17 drugs or medicines.The
Budget also proposes to add7morerarediseasesforthepurposesof exempting import duties on
personal imports of drugs, medicines and Food for Special Medical Purposes (FSMP) used in
their treatment.
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
TARIFF RATE ON ALL DUTIABLE GOODS IMPORTED FOR PERSONAL USE TO BE
REDUCED FROM 20% TO 10%
BASIC CUSTOMS DUTY TO BE EXEMPTED ON 17 DRUGS OR MEDICINES FOR
PATIENTS,PARTICULARLYCANCER-PATIENTS
SEVENMORERAREDISEASES TO BE ADDED FORTHEPURPOSESOF EXEMPTING IMPORT
DUTIES ON PERSONAL IMPORTS OF DRUGS AND FSMP
DUTYDEFERRALPERIODFOR TIER 2 &TIER 3 AUTHORISED ECONOMIC OPERATORS
(AEOS) TO BE ENHANCED FROM 15 DAYS TO 30 DAYS
EXPORT CARGO USING ELECTRONICSEALING TO
BEPROVIDEDTHROUGHCLEARANCEFROMTHEFACTORY PREMISES TO THE
SHIP
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
The Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, while
presenting the Union Budget2026-27 today in the Parliament, announcedthat the proposals for
Customs and Central Excise aim to further simplify the tariff structure, support domestic
manufacturing, promote export competitiveness, and correct inversion in duty.
EaseofLiving
The Union Budgetproposes to reduce the tariff rate on all dutiable goods imported for personal use from
20 per cent to 10 per cent
torationalizethecustomsdutystructure.Toproviderelieftopatients,particularlythosesufferingfrom cancer, the
Budgetproposes to exempt basic customs duty on 17 drugs or medicines.The Budget also proposes to
add7morerarediseasesforthepurposesof exempting import duties on personal imports of drugs, medicines
and Food for Special Medical Purposes (FSMP) used in their treatment.
The Union Budget further proposestoreviseprovisionsgoverningbaggageclearanceduring international travel
to address genuine concerns of passengers. The revised rules will enhance duty-free allowances and
provide clarity in temporary carriage of goods brought in or taken out. Furthermore, the honest taxpayers
will now be able to settle their dues and close cases by paying an additional amount in lieu of penalty, the
Budget added.
CustomsProcess
The Budgetproposes many measures for custom processes to have
minimalinterventionforsmootherandfastermovement of goods and greater certainty to the trade.
Trust-basedsystems
The Budgetproposestoenhancedutydeferralperiodfor Tier 2 and Tier 3 Authorised Economic Operators,
known as AEOs, from 15 days to 30 days. The Budget further proposes to provide eligible manufacturer-
importers the same duty deferral facility, thereby encouraging them to get themselves accredited as a full-
fledged Tier 3- AEO in due course.
The Union Budget also proposes to extend validity period of advance ruling, binding on Customs, from
the present 3 years to 5 years.Government agencies will be encouraged to leverage AEO accreditation for
preferential treatment in clearing their cargo, the Budget stated.Regular importers with trusted
longstanding supply chains willberecognizedintherisksystem,sothattheneedforverification of their cargo
every time can be minimized.Export cargo using
electronicsealingwillbeprovidedthroughclearancefromthefactory premises to the ship, the Budget stated.
Forimport ofgoods not needing any compliance, filing ofbill
ofentrybyatrustedimporter,andarrivalofgoodswillautomatically notify Customs for completing their
clearance formalities.
Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman further announced that the Customs warehousing framework will be
transformed into a warehouse operator-centric system with self-declarations, electronic tracking and risk-
based audit. These reforms will move away from the current system of officer-dependent approvals, and
reduce transaction delays and compliance costs, she added.
NB/VM/SK
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
******
FINANCE MINISTER NIRMALA SITHARAMAN INTRODUCES A DEDICATED
₹10,000 CRORE SME GROWTH FUND, TO CREATE FUTURE CHAMPIONS,
INCENTIVIZING ENTERPRISES BASED ON SELECT CRITERIA
UNION BUDGET PROPOSES 4 MEASURES TO LEVERAGE FULL POTENTIAL OF
TReDS FOR LIQUIDITY SUPPORT TO MSMEs
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
Union Minister of Finance & Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman said that the
Government led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, has decisively and consistently chosen action
over ambivalence, reform over rhetoric and people over populism.
While presenting the Union Budget 2026-27 in Parliament today, she said that the Government is
inspired by 3 kartavya, out of which the first kartavya is to accelerate and sustain economic
growth, by enhancing productivity and competitiveness, and building resilience to volatile global
dynamics.
Recognising MSMEs as a vital engine of growth, the Finance Minister proposed a three-pronged
approach to help them grow as Champions under the first Kartavya.
First is the Equity support in which, she introduced a dedicated ₹10,000 crore SME Growth
Fund, to create future Champions, incentivizing enterprises based on select criteria. She also
proposed to top up the Self-Reliant India Fund set up in 2021, with ₹2,000 crore to continue
support to micro enterprises and maintain their access to risk capital.
On the second approach of Liquidity support, the Finance Minister said that with TReDS, more
than ₹7 lakh crore has been made available to MSMEs. To leverage its full potential, she
proposed 4 measures: (i) mandate TReDS as the transaction settlement platform for all purchases
from MSMEs by CPSEs, serving as a benchmark for other corporates; (ii) introduce a credit
guarantee support mechanism through CGTMSE for invoice discounting on TReDS platform;
(iii) link GeM with TReDS for sharing information with financiers about government purchases
from MSMEs, encouraging cheaper and quicker financing; (iv) introduce TReDS receivables as
asset-backed securities, helping develop a secondary market, enhancing liquidity and settlement
of transactions.
On the final approach of Professional support, Smt.Nirmala Sitharaman pointed out that the
Government will facilitate Professional Institutions such as ICAI, ICSI, ICMAI to design short-
term, modular courses and practical tools to develop a cadre of ‘Corporate Mitras’, especially in
Tier-II and Tier-III towns. These accredited para-professionals will help MSMEs meet
compliance requirements at affordable costs.
****
NB/GDH
‘Bharat-VISTAAR’-a multilingual AI tool to enhance farm productivity, improve farmer
decision making and reduce risk through customized advisory support, proposed in the
Union Budget 2026-27
15,000 secondary schools and 500 colleges to have Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming and
Comics (AVGC) Content Creator Labs to boost India’s Orange Economy
Union Budget proposes a High-Powered ‘Education to Employment and Enterprise’
Standing Committee to assess impact of AI and emerging technologies on jobs and skill
requirement
A new National Institute of Design to boost design education and development in Eastern
India
The Union Finance and Corporate Affairs Minister, Smt Nirmala Sitharaman presented the
Union Budget 2026-27 in the Parliament today. The Budget cites Emerging technologies and AI
as important components in realizing the second kartavya of fulfilling aspirations of common
citizens and buisld their capacity to make them strong partners in India’s path to prosperity.
Acknowledging that the adoption of technology is for the benefit of all, i.e. the farmers, women
in STEM, youth keen to upskill and Divyangjan to access newer opportunities, the Union Budget
2026-27 highlights key government initiatives to support new technologies through AI Mission,
National Quantum Mission, Anusandhan National Research Fund, and Research, Development
and Innovation Fund.
With the emerging technologies playing a pivotal role in India’s Orange Economy, the Budget
underscores India’s Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming and Comics (AVGC) sector as a growing
industry projected to require 2 million professionals by 2030.The Union Budget proposes to
support the Indian Institute of Creative Technologies, Mumbai in setting up AVGC Content
Creator Labs in 15,000 secondary schools and 500 colleges in furtherance of India’s Orange
economy.
Further, the Budget proposes a new National Institute of Design to boost design education and
development in the eastern region of India, acknowledging the rapidly expanding Design
Industry of India.
The Union budget proposes ‘Bharat-VISTAAR’(Virtually Integrated System to Access Agricultural
Resources)—a multilingual AI tool that shall integrate the AgriStack portals and the ICAR
package on agricultural practices with AI systems. This will enhance farm productivity, will lead
to better farmer decision making and reduce risk through customized advisory support for the
farmer
Furthermore, taking note of the impact of AI and emerging technologies on jobs and skill
requirements, the Budget proposes a High-Powered ‘Education to Employment and Enterprise’
Standing Committee for assessment and propose measures thereof.
*****
NB/SB/PK
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
THE THRESHOLD FOR AVAILING SAFE HARBOUR FOR IT SERVICES
ENHANCED FROM RS 300 CRORE TO Rs 2000 CRORE
SAFE HARBOUR FOR IT SERVICES SHALL BE APPROVED BY AN
AUTOMATED RULE-DRIVEN PROCESS
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
The Union Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs, Smt Nirmala Sitharaman presented
the Union Budget 2026-2027 in the Parliament today.
Presenting the Budget, the Finance Minister said that India is a global leader in software
development services, IT enabled services, knowledge process outsourcing services and
contract R&D services relating to software development. These business segments are
quite inter-connected with each other. All these services are proposed to be clubbed under
a single category Information Technology Services with a common safe harbour margin
of 15.5 percent applicable to all. The threshold for availing safe harbour for IT services
has been enhanced substantially from 300 crore rupees to 2,000 crore rupees in the Union
Budget 2026-27.
The Finance Minister further said that Safe harbour for IT services shall be approved by
an automated rule-driven process without any need for tax officer to examine and accept
the application. Once applied by an IT Services company, the same safe harbour can be
continued for a period of 5 years at a stretch at its choice.
For IT services companies who want to conclude Advance Pricing Agreement (APA), the
Finance Minister announced fast track Unilateral APA process for IT services and
endeavour to conclude it within a period of 2 years. The period of 2 years can be
extended by a further period of 6 months on taxpayer’s request. The facility of modified
returns available to the entity entering APA to its associated entities is also extended.
NB/ Pankaj Srivastav
PRESS INFORMATINO BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
******
₹12.2 LAKH CRORE PUBLIC CAPEX PROPOSED IN FY2026-27
7 HIGH-SPEED RAIL CORRIDORS, A DEDICATED FREIGHT CORRIDOR AND 20
NEW NATIONAL WATERWAYS PROPOSED
INFRASTRUCTURE RISK GUARANTEE FUND TO BOOST THE CONFIDENCE OF
PRIVATE DEVELOPERS
SEAPLANE VGF SCHEME TO BE INTRODUCED TO INCENTIVIZE INDIGENOUS
MANUFACTURING OF SEAPLANE
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
While presenting the Union Budget 2026-27 in Parliament today, Union Minister for Finance
and Corporate Affairs, Smt Nirmala Sitharaman said; “Our first kartavya is to accelerate and
sustain economic growth, by enhancing productivity and competitiveness, and building resilience
to volatile global dynamics”.
The Finance Minister in her budget speech today said that the Public capex has increased
manifold from ₹2 lakh crore in FY2014-15 to an allocation of ₹11.2 lakh crore in BE 2025-26,
and in FY2026-27, the Minister proposed to increase it to ₹12.2 lakh crore to continue the
momentum. She further told the Parliament that during this past decade, the Government has
undertaken several initiatives for large-scale enhancement of public infrastructure including
through new financing instruments such as Infrastructure Investment Trusts (InVITs) and Real
Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) and institutions like NIIF and NABFID. Over the years,
REITs have emerged as a successful instrument for asset monetisation. The Budget 2026-27
proposes to accelerate recycling of significant real estate assets of CPSEs through the setting up
of dedicated REITs.
Infrastructure Risk Guarantee Fund
To strengthen the confidence of private developers regarding risks during infrastructure
development and construction phase, the Finance Minister proposed to set up an Infrastructure
Risk Guarantee Fund to provide prudently calibrated partial credit guarantees to lenders.
Environmentally Sustainable Movement of Cargo
To promote this objective, the Budget proposes to establish new Dedicated Freight Corridors
connecting Dankuni in the East, to Surat in the West and it also proposes to operationalise 20
new National Waterways (NW) over next 5 years. This is envisaged to start with NW-5 in
Odisha to connect mineral rich areas of Talcher and Angul and industrial centres like Kalinga
Nagar to the Ports of Paradeep and Dhamra. To increase the share of inland waterways and
coastal shipping from 6 % to 12 % by 2047, the Finance Minister proposed to launch a Coastal
Cargo Promotion Scheme for incentivizing a modal shift from rail and road.
Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman said that Training Institutes will also be set up as Regional Centres of
Excellence for development of the required manpower, which will benefit youth in the entire
stretch of the waterways to train and acquire skills. Further, a ship repair ecosystem catering to
inland waterways is also proposed to be set up at Varanasi and Patna.
7 High-Speed Rail corridors
In order to promote environmentally sustainable passenger systems, in her Budget speech, the
Finance Minister proposed to develop seven High-Speed Rail corridors between cities as
‘growth connectors’, namely i) Mumbai-Pune, ii) Pune-Hyderabad, iii) Hyderabad-Bengaluru,
iv) Hyderabad-Chennai, v) Chennai-Bengaluru, vi) Delhi-Varanasi, vii) Varanasi-Siliguri.
Seaplane VGF Scheme
To enhance last-mile and remote connectivity, and promote tourism, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman
proposed to give incentives to indigenize manufacturing of seaplanes and said that a Seaplane
VGF Scheme will be introduced to provide support for operations.
Carbon Capture Utilization and Storage (CCUS)
Aligning with the roadmap launched in December 2025, CCUS technologies at scale will
achieve higher readiness levels in end-use applications across five industrial sectors, including,
power, steel, cement, refineries and chemicals, said the Finance Minister. The Budget proposes
an outlay of ₹20,000 crore over the next 5 years for the same.
City Economic Regions
The Finance Minister said that the cities are India’s engines of growth, innovation and
opportunities. It proposes to now focus on Tier II and Tier III cities, and even temple-towns,
which need modern infrastructure and basic amenities. In order to deliver the economic power of
agglomerations, city economic regions (CER) will be mapped based on their specific growth
drivers. The Finance Minister proposed an allocation of ₹ 5000 crore per CER over 5 years for
implementing.
NB/AK/PSF
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
***
CUSTOMS INTEGRATED SYSTEM WILL BE ROLLED OUT IN 2 YEARS AS A
SINGLE, INTEGRATED AND SCALABLE PLATFORM
FISH CATCH BY AN INDIAN FISHING VESSEL IN EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC ZONE
OR ON THE HIGH SEAS WILL BE MADE FREE OF DUTY
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
The Government will roll out Customs Integrated System (CIS) in 2 years as a single, integrated
and scalable platform for all the customs processes.
Announcing this while presenting the Union Budget 2026-27 in Parliament today, Union
Minister of Finance & Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman said that utilization of non-
intrusive scanning with advanced imaging and AI technology for risk assessment will be
expanded in a phased manner with the objective to scan every container across all the major
ports.
The Union Minister further said that approvals required for cargo clearance from various
Government agencies will be seamlessly processed through a single and interconnected digital
window by the end of the financial year. She said that processes involved in clearance of food,
drugs, plant, animal & wild life products, accounting for around 70 percent of interdicted cargo,
will be operationalised on this system by April 2026 itself.
The Union Minister further said that for goods not having any compliance requirement, clearance
will be done by Customs immediately after online registration is completed by the importer,
subject to the payment of duty.
New export opportunities: The Finance Minister also said that the following measures will be
taken to support Indian fishermen to fully harness the economic value of marine resources
beyond our territorial waters:
a. Fish catch by an Indian fishing vessel in Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) or on the High Seas
will be made free of duty.
b. Landing of such fish on foreign port will be treated as export of goods.
She also said that safeguards will be put in place to prevent misuse during fish catch, transit and
transshipment.
The Finance Minister further announced a complete removal of the current value cap of ₹10 lakh
per consignment on courier exports to support aspirations of India’s small businesses, artisans
and start-ups to access global markets through e-commerce. In addition, handling of rejected and
returned consignments will be improved with effective use of technology for identifying such
consignments, she added.
The Finance Minister further said that there are honest taxpayers who are willing to settle
disputes by paying all their dues, but they get deterred due to negative connotation associated
with penalty. They will now be able close cases by paying an additional amount in lieu of
penalty, she added.
***
NB /ISA
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
******
UNION BUDGET 2026-27 ANNOUNCES DIRECT TAX PROPOSALS FOR
RATIONALIZING PENALTY AND PROSECUTION
ASSESSMENT AND PENALTY PROCEEDINGS TO BE INTEGRATED TO AVOID
MULTIPLICITY OF PROCEEDINGS AND FACILITATING EASE OF DOING
BUSINESS
IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION FOR NON-DISCLOSURE OF NON IMMOVABLE
FOREIGN ASSETS WITH AGGREGATE VALUE LESS THAN Rs 20 LAKH WITH
RETROSPECTIVE EFFECT FROM 01.10.2024
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
The Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs, Smt Nirmala Sitharaman presented the
Union Budget 2026-27 in the Parliament today. The Budget proposes set of Direct Tax proposals
aiming at rationalizing penalty and prosecution.
The Finance Minister proposed to integrate assessment and penalty proceedings by way of a
common order for both to avoid multiplicity of proceedings. There will be no interest liability
on the taxpayer on the penalty amount for the period of appeal before the first appellate authority
irrespective of the outcome of appeal process. Further, queantum of pre-payment is being
reduced from 20 percent to 10 percent and will continue to be calculated only on core tax
demand.
As an additional measure for reducing litigation, the Finance Minister proposed to allow
taxpayers to update their returns even after reassessment proceedings have been initiated, at an
additional 10 percent tax rate over and above the rate applicable for the relevant year. The
assessing officer will then use only this updated return in his proceedings.
There is already a framework for immunity from penalty and prosecution in the cases of
underreporting. The Finance Minister proposed to apply this framework of immunity to
misreporting too. However, in such a case the taxpayer will need to pay 100 percent of the tax
amount as an additional income tax over and above the tax and interest due.
Penalties for certain technical defaults such as failure to get accounts audited, non-furnishing of
transfer pricing audit report and default in furnishing statement for financial transactions, are
proposed to be converted into fee.
The Finance Minister proposed to rationalise prosecution framework under the Income Tax Act
while maintaining a careful balance for deterrence in some serious offences.
Non-production of books of account and documents, and requirement of TDS payment, where
payment is made in kind, are being decriminalised. Further, minor offences will attract fine only.
The remaining prosecutions will be graded commensurate with the quantum of offence. They
will entail only simple imprisonment, with maximum imprisonment reduced to two years, and
power to courts to convert even those into fine.
There is no penalty presently for non-disclosure of non immovable foreign assets with aggregate
value less than 20 lakh rupees. The Finance Minister proposed to also provide them with
immunity from prosecution with retrospective effect from 1.10.2024.
NB/VM/KM
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
******
UNION BUDGET 2026-27 ANNOUNCES DIRECT TAX PROPOSALS FOR
RATIONALIZING PENALTY AND PROSECUTION
ASSESSMENT AND PENALTY PROCEEDINGS TO BE INTEGRATED TO AVOID
MULTIPLICITY OF PROCEEDINGS AND FACILITATING EASE OF DOING
BUSINESS
IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION FOR NON-DISCLOSURE OF NON IMMOVABLE
FOREIGN ASSETS WITH AGGREGATE VALUE LESS THAN Rs 20 LAKH WITH
RETROSPECTIVE EFFECT FROM 01.10.2024
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
The Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs, Smt Nirmala Sitharaman presented the
Union Budget 2026-27 in the Parliament today. The Budget proposes set of Direct Tax proposals
aiming at rationalizing penalty and prosecution.
The Finance Minister proposed to integrate assessment and penalty proceedings by way of a
common order for both to avoid multiplicity of proceedings. There will be no interest liability
on the taxpayer on the penalty amount for the period of appeal before the first appellate authority
irrespective of the outcome of appeal process. Further, queantum of pre-payment is being
reduced from 20 percent to 10 percent and will continue to be calculated only on core tax
demand.
As an additional measure for reducing litigation, the Finance Minister proposed to allow
taxpayers to update their returns even after reassessment proceedings have been initiated, at an
additional 10 percent tax rate over and above the rate applicable for the relevant year. The
assessing officer will then use only this updated return in his proceedings.
There is already a framework for immunity from penalty and prosecution in the cases of
underreporting. The Finance Minister proposed to apply this framework of immunity to
misreporting too. However, in such a case the taxpayer will need to pay 100 percent of the tax
amount as an additional income tax over and above the tax and interest due.
Penalties for certain technical defaults such as failure to get accounts audited, non-furnishing of
transfer pricing audit report and default in furnishing statement for financial transactions, are
proposed to be converted into fee.
The Finance Minister proposed to rationalise prosecution framework under the Income Tax Act
while maintaining a careful balance for deterrence in some serious offences.
Non-production of books of account and documents, and requirement of TDS payment, where
payment is made in kind, are being decriminalised. Further, minor offences will attract fine only.
The remaining prosecutions will be graded commensurate with the quantum of offence. They
will entail only simple imprisonment, with maximum imprisonment reduced to two years, and
power to courts to convert even those into fine.
There is no penalty presently for non-disclosure of non immovable foreign assets with aggregate
value less than 20 lakh rupees. The Finance Minister proposed to also provide them with
immunity from prosecution with retrospective effect from 1.10.2024.
NB/VM/KM
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
*******
EASE OF LIVING BY DIRECT TAX REFORMS : UNION BUDGET 2026-2027
ANY INTEREST AWARDED BY THE MOTOR ACCIDENT CLAIMS TRIBUNAL TO
A NATURAL PERSON TO BE EXEMPT FROM INCOME TAX
SCHE
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
*******
EASE OF LIVING BY DIRECT TAX REFORMS : UNION BUDGET 2026-2027
ANY INTEREST AWARDED BY THE MOTOR ACCIDENT CLAIMS TRIBUNAL TO
A NATURAL PERSON TO BE EXEMPT FROM INCOME TAX
SCHEME FOR SMALL TAXPAYERS TO ENABLE OBTAINING A LOWER OR NIL
DEDUCTION CERTIFICATE BY A RULE-BASED AUTOMATED PROCESS
TIME AVAILABLE FOR REVISING RETURNS EXTENDED FROM 31st DECEMBER
TO 31st MARCH, FOR A NOMINAL FEE
ONE-TIME 6-MONTH FOREIGN ASSET DISCLOSURE SCHEME FOR SMALL
TAXPAYERS TO DISCLOSE INCOME OR ASSETS
New Delhi, 1 February, 2026
A range of proposals on Direct Taxes to ensure ‘Ease of living’ for taxpayers have been
announced by Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman
during the Union Budget 2026-27 speech in Parliament today.
Ease of Living
The Budget proposes that any interest awarded by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal to a
natural person will be exempt from Income Tax, and any TDS on this account will be done away
with. It proposes to reduce TCS rate on the sale of overseas tour program package from the
current 5 percent and 20 percent to 2 percent without any stipulation of amount.
It aims to reduce TCS rate for pursuing education and for medical purposes under the Liberalized
Remittance Scheme (LRS) from 5 percent to 2 percent. Supply of manpower services is
proposed to be specifically brought within the ambit of payment to contractors for the purpose of
TDS to avoid ambiguity. Thus, TDS on these services will be at the rate of either 1 percent or 2
percent only.
ME FOR SMALL TAXPAYERS TO ENABLE OBTAINING A LOWER OR NIL
DEDUCTION CERTIFICATE BY A RULE-BASED AUTOMATED PROCESS
TIME AVAILABLE FOR REVISING RETURNS EXTENDED FROM 31st DECEMBER
TO 31st MARCH, FOR A NOMINAL FEE
ONE-TIME 6-MONTH FOREIGN ASSET DISCLOSURE SCHEME FOR SMALL
TAXPAYERS TO DISCLOSE INCOME OR ASSETS
New Delhi, 1 February, 2026
A range of proposals on Direct Taxes to ensure ‘Ease of living’ for taxpayers have been
announced by Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman
during the Union Budget 2026-27 speech in Parliament today.
Ease of Living
The Budget proposes that any interest awarded by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal to a
natural person will be exempt from Income Tax, and any TDS on this account will be done away
with. It proposes to reduce TCS rate on the sale of overseas tour program package from the
current 5 percent and 20 percent to 2 percent without any stipulation of amount.
It aims to reduce TCS rate for pursuing education and for medical purposes under the Liberalized
Remittance Scheme (LRS) from 5 percent to 2 percent. Supply of manpower services is
proposed to be specifically brought within the ambit of payment to contractors for the purpose of
TDS to avoid ambiguity. Thus, TDS on these services will be at the rate of either 1 percent or 2
percent only.
Ease for Taxpayers
A scheme for small taxpayers is proposed wherein a rule-based automated process will enable
obtaining a lower or nil deduction certificate instead of filing an application with the assessing
officer. For the ease of taxpayers holding securities in multiple companies, the budget proposes
to enable depositories to accept Form 15G or Form 15H from the investor and provide it directly
to various relevant companies. It extends time available for revising returns from 31st December
to up to 31st March with the payment of a nominal fee.
Relaxed Tax return Timeline
The Budget proposes to stagger the timeline for filing of tax returns. Individuals with ITR 1 and
ITR 2 returns will continue to file till 31st July and non-audit business cases or trusts are
proposed to be allowed time till 31st August. TDS on the sale of immovable property by a non-
resident is proposed to be deducted and deposited through resident buyer’s PAN based challan
instead of requiring TAN.
Focus on Small Taxpayers
To address practical issues of small taxpayers like students, young professionals, tech
employees, relocated NRIs, and such others, it aims to introduce a one-time 6-month foreign
asset disclosure scheme for these taxpayers to disclose income or assets below a certain size.
This scheme would be applicable for two categories of taxpayers namely, (A) who did not
disclose their overseas income or asset and (B) who disclosed their overseas income and/or paid
due tax, but could not declare the asset acquired.
For category (A), the limit of undisclosed income/asset is proposed to be up to 1 crore rupees.
They need to pay 30 percent of Fair Market Value of asset or 30 percent of undisclosed income
as tax and 30 percent as additional income tax in lieu of penalty and would thereby get immunity
from prosecution. For category (B), asset value is proposed to be up to 5 crore rupees. Here,
immunity from both penalty and prosecution will be available with the payment of fee of 1 lakh
rupees.
NB/VM/DAM
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
EXEMPTION FROM MINIMUM ALTERNATE TAX (MAT) TO ALL NON-RESIDENTS WHO
PAY TAX ON PRESUMPTIVE BASIS
TAX HOLIDAY TILL 2047 TO ANY FOREIGN COMPANY THAT PROVIDES CLOUD
SERVICES TO CUSTOMERS GLOBALLY BY USING DATA CENTRE SERVICES FROM
INDIA
SAFE HARBOUR OF 15 PERCENT ON COST IN CASE THE COMPANY PROVIDING DATA
CENTRE SERVICES FROM INDIA IS A RELATED ENTITY
New Delhi, 1st February 2026
Recognising the need to enable critical infrastructure and boost investment in data centres,the Union
Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman,while presenting the Union Budget
2026-27 in Parliament today, proposed to provide tax holiday till 2047 to any foreign company that
provides cloud services to customers globally by using data centre services from India. It will, however,
need to provide services to Indian customers through an Indian reseller entity.
The Union Budget also proposes to provide a safe harbour of 15 percent on cost in case the company
providing data centre services from India is a related entity.
To harness the efficiency of just-in-time logistics for electronic manufacturing, the Union Finance
Ministerproposed in the budget to provide safe harbour to non-residents for component warehousing in a
bonded warehouse at a profit margin of 2 percent of the invoice value. The resultant tax of about 0.7
percent will be much lower than in competing jurisdictions.
The Union Finance Minister in order to provide fillip to toll manufacturing in India, hasproposedin the
Union budget 2026-27, to provide exemption from income tax for 5 years, to any non-resident
whoprovides capital goods, equipment or tooling, to any toll manufacturer in a bonded zone.
The Budget proposals also provide exemption to global (non-India sourced) income of a non-resident
expert, for a stay period of 5 years under notified schemes. This is intended to encourage vast pool of
global talent to work in India for a longer period of time
The Union budget also proposes to provide exemption from Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) to all non-
residents who pay tax on presumptive basis.
NB/PS
74-83
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
******
UNION BUDGET 2026-27 OUTLINES THE KARTAVYA OF SAB KA SATH,
SAB KA VIKAS TOWARDS A VIKSIT BHARAT
TARGETED EFFORTS FOR INCREASING FARMERS’ INCOME,
EMPOWERING DIVYANGJAN, EMPOWERING THE VULNERABLE ,
FOCUS ON THE PURVODAYA STATES AND THE NORTH-EAST REGION
COCONUT PROMOTION SCHEME, DEDICATED PROGRAMME FOR
INDIAN CASHEW & COCOA, PROMOTING CULTIVATION OF
SANDALWOOD AND DEDICATED PROGRAMME FOR WALNUTS,
ALMONDS AND PINE NUTS ANNOUNCED
st
New Delhi 1 February, 2026
Presenting the Union Budget 2026-27 in Parliament today, the Union Minister for
Finance & Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman stated that the third
Kartavya, aligns with the Government’s vision of Sabka Sath, Sabka Vikas, to
ensure that every family, community, region and sector has access to resources,
amenities and opportunities for meaningful participation.
The Finance Minister laid down a broad roadmap for achieving the third Kartavya.
Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman said, “This requires targeted efforts for a) Increasing
farmer incomes through productivity enhancement and entrepreneurship, with
special access attention to small and marginal farmers; b) Empowering Divyangjan
through to livelihood opportunities, training and high-quality assistive devices; c)
Empowering the vulnerable to access mental health and trauma care; d) Focus on
the Purvodaya States and the North-East Region to accelerate development and
employment opportunities.“
Increasing Farmer’s Income
Under the broad objective of Increasing Farmer Incomes, the Budget includes
provisions for integrated development of 500 reservoirs and Amrit Sarovars,
strengthening the fisheries value chain in coastal areas and enabling market
linkages involving start-ups and women-led groups together with Fish Farmers
Producer Organisations.
Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman stated that Animal Husbandry will be one of the key
areas for increasing farmers’ income. To provide quality employment
opportunities in rural and peri-urban areas, Government will support the Animal
Husbandry Sector in entrepreneurship development through: (a) a Credit-Linked
Subsidy Programme (b) scaling-up and modernisation of livestock enterprises (c)
enhance creation of livestock, dairy and poultry-focused integrated-value chains
and (d) encourage creation of Livestock Farmer Producers Organisations.
The Union Finance Minister laid stress on high Value Agriculture by supporting
high value crops such as coconut, sandalwood, cocoa and cashew in the coastal
areas. Agar trees in North East and nuts such as, almonds, walnuts and pine nuts
in our hilly regions will also be supported.
Smt. Sitharaman said, “India is the world’s largest producer of coconuts. About 30
million people, including nearly 10 million farmers, depend on coconuts for their
livelihood. To further enhance competitiveness in coconut production, I propose a
Coconut Promotion Scheme to increase production and enhance productivity
through various interventions 16 including replacing old and non-productive trees
with new saplings/plants/varieties in major coconut growing States.”
As another step towards the objective of increasing farmers’ income, the Union
Budget 2026-27 has also proposed a dedicated programme for Indian cashew and
cocoa to make India self-reliant in raw cashew and cocoa production and
processing, enhance export competitiveness and transform Indian Cashew and
Indian Cocoa into premium global brands by 2030.
Union Government will also partner with State Governments to promote focused
cultivation and post-harvest processing to restore the glory of the Indian
Sandalwood ecosystem.
To rejuvenate old, low-yielding orchards and expand high-density cultivation of
walnuts, almonds and pine nuts, the Budget proposes to support a dedicated
programme to enhance farmer incomes and in bringing value addition by
engaging youth.
Bharat-VISTAAR (Virtually Integrated System to Access Agricultural Resources)
Union Minister for Finance and Corporate affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman
announced the proposal to launch Bharat-VISTAAR (Virtually Integrated System to
Access Agricultural Resources).VISTAAR is envisaged as a multilingual AI tool that
shall integrate the AgriStack portals and the ICAR package on agricultural
practices with AI systems. This will enhance farm productivity, enable better
decisions for farmers and reduce risk by providing customized advisory support.
******
RC/VA
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
******
UNION BUDGET 2026-27 PROPOSES SEVERAL INCENTIVES FOR COOPERATIVES
SUPPLY OF CATTLE FEED AND COTTON SEED PRODUCED BY A PRIMARY
COOPERATIVE SOCIETY ALLOWED FOR DEDUCTION
INTER-COOPERATIVE SOCIETY DIVIDEND INCOME ALLOWED AS DEDUCTION
UNDER THE NEW TAXATION REGIME
st
New Delhi 1 February, 2026
Union Budget 2026-27 has proposed several incentives for primary cooperative
societies. Presenting the Budget in Parliament today, Union Minister for Finance
and Corporate Affairs Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman proposed to extend the deduction
allowed to a primary cooperative society for supply of cattle feed and cotton
seed produced by its members. Presently, deduction is allowed to a primary
cooperative society engaged in supplying milk, oilseeds, fruits or vegetables raised
or grown by its members.
The Finance Minister also proposed to allow inter-cooperative society dividend
income as deduction under the new tax regime to the extent it is further
distributed to its members.
As an additional measure to support National Cooperative Federations, Smt.
Nirmala Sitharaman further proposed to allow exemption for a period of 3 years,
to dividend income received by a notified national co operative federation, on
their investments made in companies up to 31.1.2026. This exemption would be
allowed only for dividends further distributed to its member co-operatives.
******
NB/RC/VA
THE UNION BUDGET 2026-27 PROPOSES HIGH-POWERED ‘EDUCATION TO
EMPLOYMENT AND ENTERPRISE’ STANDING COMMITTEE TO RECOMMEND
MEASURES ON THE SERVICES SECTOR
NEW NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DESIGN TO BE ESTABLISHED IN THE EASTERN
REGION OF INDIA THROUGH CHALLENGE ROUTE
CREATION OF 5 UNIVERSITY TOWNSHIPS IN THE VICINITY OF MAJOR
INDUSTRIAL AND LOGISTIC CORRIDORS
1 GIRLS’ HOSTEL WILL BE ESTABLISHED IN EVERY DISTRICT THROUGH
VGF/CAPITAL SUPPORT
4 TELESCOPE INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES TO BE SET UP OR UPGRADED TO
PROMOTE ASTROPHYSICS AND ASTRONOMY
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
The Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, presented the
Union Budget 2026-27 in Parliament today. The Union Budget proposes to set up a High-
Powered ‘Education to Employment and Enterprise’ Standing Committee to recommend
measures that focus on the Services Sector as a core driver of Viksit Bharat. This will make India
a global leader in services, with a 10% global share by 2047. The Committee will prioritise areas
to optimise the potential for growth, employment and exports. They will also assess the impact
of emerging technologies, including AI, on jobs and skill requirements and propose measures
thereof.
The Indian design industry is expanding rapidly and yet there is a shortage of Indian designers.
The Union Budget proposes to establish, through challenge route, a new National Institute of
Design to boost design education and development in the eastern region of India.
The Government will support States, through challenge route, in creating 5 University
Townships in the vicinity of major industrial and logistic corridors. These planned academic
zones will host multiple universities, colleges, research institutions, skill centres and residential
complexes.
In the Higher Education STEM institutions, prolonged hours of study and laboratory work pose
some challenges for girl students. The Union Budget proposes to establish 1 girls’ hostel in every
district through VGF/capital support.
To promote Astrophysics and Astronomy via immersive experiences, 4 Telescope Infrastructure
facilities will be set up or upgraded - the National Large Solar Telescope, the National Large
Optical infrared Telescope, the Himalayan Chandra Telescope and the COSMOS 2 Planetarium.
NB/BJK
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
****
UNION BUDGET 2026-27 PROPOSES A SCHEME TO SUPPORT STATES IN
ESTABLISHING FIVE REGIONAL MEDICAL HUBS TO PROMOTE MEDICAL
TOURISM
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOSPITALITY PROPOSED TO BE SET UP BY
UPGRADING THE EXISTING NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR HOTEL MANAGEMENT
AND CATERING TECHNOLOGY
PILOT SCHEME PROPOSED FOR UPSKILLING 10,000 GUIDES IN 20 ICONIC
TOURIST SITES THROUGH A STANDARDIZED, HIGH-QUALITY 12-WEEK
TRAINING COURSE
15 ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES PROPOSED TO BE DEVELOPED; EXCAVATED
LANDSCAPES WILL BE OPENED TO THE PUBLIC THROUGH CURATED
WALKWAYS
SCHEME FOR DEVELOPMENT OF BUDDHIST CIRCUITS IN ARUNACHAL
PRADESH, SIKKIM, ASSAM, MANIPUR, MIZORAM AND TRIPURA PROPOSED IN
THE BUDGET
New Delhi,01 February 2026
Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman while presenting
the Union Budget 2026-27 in Parliament said, “To promote India as a hub for medical tourism
services, I propose to launch a Scheme to support States in establishing five Regional Medical
Hubs, in partnership with the private sector.”
Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman stated that these Hubs will serve as integrated healthcare complexes
that combine medical, educational and research facilities. She also added “They will have
AYUSH Centres, Medical Value Tourism Facilitation Centres and infrastructure for diagnostics,
post-care and rehabilitation. These Hubs will provide diverse job opportunities for health
professionals including doctors and AHPs.”
Tourism
The Finance Minister said, “The Tourism sector has the potential to play a large role in
employment generation, forex earnings and expanding the local economy.”
She said, “I propose to set up a National Institute of Hospitality by upgrading the existing
National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology. It will function as a bridge
between academia, industry and the Government.”
Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman proposed a pilot
scheme for upskilling 10,000 guides in 20 iconic tourist sites through a standardized, high-
quality 12-week training course in hybrid mode, in collaboration with an Indian Institute of
Management.”
She also stated, “A National Destination Digital Knowledge Grid will be established to digitally
document all places of significance—cultural, spiritual and heritage. This initiative will create a
new ecosystem of jobs for local researchers, historians, content creators and technology
partners.”
The Finance Minister said, “India has the potential and opportunity to offer world-class trekking
and hiking experience. We will develop ecologically sustainable (i) Mountain trails in Himachal
Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu and Kashmir; Araku Valley in the Eastern Ghats and Podhigai
Malai in the Western Ghats. (ii) Turtle Trails along key nesting sites in the coastal areas 14 of
Odisha, Karnataka and Kerala; and (iii) Bird watching trails along the Pulikat lake in Andhra
Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.”
She further said, “Under the visionary leadership of Honorable Prime Minister, we established
the International Big Cat Alliance in 2024. This year, India is hosting the first ever Global Big
Cat Summit, where heads of governments and ministers from 95 range countries will deliberate
on collective strategies for conservation.”
Heritage and Culture Tourism
Speaking on the theme of Heritage and Culture Tourism, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman proposed to
develop 15 archaeological sites including Lothal, Dholavira, Rakhigarhi, Adichanallur, Sarnath,
Hastinapur, and Leh Palace into vibrant, experiential cultural destinations”.
She further said “Excavated landscapes will be opened to the public through curated walkways.
Immersive storytelling skills and technologies will be introduced to help conservation labs,
interpretation centres, and guides.”
Focus on the Purvodaya States and the North-Eastern Region
Speaking on Purvodaya Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman stated, “I propose the development of an
integrated East Coast Industrial Corridor with a well-connected node at Durgapur, creation of 5
tourism destinations in the 5 Purvodaya States, and the provision of 4,000 e-buses.”
Speaking about Buddhist Sites in North-Eastern Region, she said that the North-Eastern Region
is a civilizational confluence of Theravada and 18 Mahayana/Vajrayana traditions.
The Finance Minister further proposed to launch a Scheme for Development of Buddhist
Circuits in Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Assam, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura. The Scheme will
cover preservation of temples and monasteries, pilgrimage interpretation centers, connectivity
and pilgrim amenities.”
NB/VM/RC/SK
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
*****
‘HIGH LEVEL COMMITTEE ON BANKING FOR VIKSIT BHARAT’ TO ALIGN
FINANCIAL SECTOR WITH INDIA’S NEXT PHASE OF GROWTH: UNION BUDGET
2026-27
GOVERNMENT TO RESTRUCTURE THE POWER FINANCE CORPORATION AND
RURAL ELECTRIFICATION CORPORATION TO ACHIEVE SCALE AND IMPROVE
EFFICIENCY
UNION BUDGET PROPOSES A MARKET MAKING FRAMEWORK WITH
SUITABLE ACCESS TO FUNDS AND DERIVATIVES ON CORPORATE BOND
INDICES
TO ENCOURAGE THE ISSUANCE OF MUNICIPAL BONDS OF HIGHER VALUE,
INCENTIVE OF ₹100 CRORE FOR A SINGLE BOND ISSUANCE OF MORE THAN
₹1000 CRORE
INDIVIDUAL PERSONS RESIDENT OUTSIDE INDIA TO BE PERMITTED TO
INVEST IN EQUITY INSTRUMENTS OF LISTED INDIAN COMPANIES THROUGH
THE PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT SCHEME
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
The Union Budget 2026-27 proposes to set up a ‘High Level Committee on Banking for Viksit
Bharat’. Presenting the Union Budget in Parliament today, the Union Minister of Finance and
Corporate Affairs Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman said that it will comprehensively review the
financial sector and align it with India’s next phase of growth, while safeguarding financial
stability, inclusion and consumer protection. Indian banking sector today is characterised by
strong balance sheets, historic highs in profitability, improved asset quality and coverage
exceeding 98% of villages in the country, the Union Budget noted.
The Union Budget proposes to restructure the Power Finance Corporation and Rural
Electrification Corporation to achieve scale and improve efficiency in the Public Sector NBFCs.
The vision for NBFCs for Viksit Bharat has been outlined with clear targets for credit
disbursement and technology adoption.
Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman proposes a comprehensive review of the Foreign Exchange
Management (Non-debt Instruments) Rules in the Union Budget to create a more contemporary,
user-friendly framework for foreign investments consistent with India’s evolving economic
priorities.
The Union Budget 2026-27 also proposes for a market making framework with suitable access to
funds and derivatives on corporate bond indices along with a proposal for total return swaps on
corporate bonds.
To encourage the issuance of municipal bonds of higher value by large cities, the Union Budget
proposes an incentive of ₹100 crore for a single bond issuance of more than ₹1000 crore. The
current scheme under AMRUT which incentivises issuances up to ₹200 crore, will also continue
to support smaller and medium towns.
To enhance ease of doing business, Individual Persons Resident Outside India (PROI) will be
permitted to invest in equity instruments of listed Indian companies through the Portfolio
Investment Scheme. The Union Budget also proposes to increase the investment limit for an
individual PROI under this scheme from 5% to 10%, with an overall investment limit for all
individual PROIs to 24%, from the current 10%.
*****
NB/SB/NS
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
*****
UNION BUDGET 2026-27 PROPOSES DEDICATED INITIATIVE FOR SPORTS
GOODS TO PROMOTE MANUFACTURING, RESEARCH AND INNOVATION
INITIATIVE BUILDS ON INDIA’S POTENTIAL TO EMERGE AS A GLOBAL HUB
FOR HIGH QUALITY, AFFORDABLE SPORTS GOODS
KHELO INDIA MISSION ANNOUNCED TO TRANSFORM THE SPORTS SECTOR
OVER NEXT DECADE
KHELO INDIA MISSION TO TAKE FORWARD THE SYSTEMATIC NURTURING
OF SPORTS TALENT SET IN MOTION THROUGH KHELO INDIA PROGRAMME
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
Leveraging India’s potential to emerge as a global hub for high quality, affordable sports goods,
a dedicated initiative for sports goods is set to be launched in the country. This was stated by
Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, while presenting
the Union Budget 2026-27 in Parliament today.
The announcement on sports goods is centred on the first of the three kartavyas that form the
pillars of this year’s Budget, namely, ‘to accelerate and sustain economic growth, by enhancing
productivity and competitiveness, and building resilience to volatile global dynamics’. The aim
of the sports goods initiative is to promote manufacturing, research and innovation, in both
equipment design as well as material sciences.
The Union Budget puts forth another key proposal that seeks to strengthen India’s sporting
ecosystem. In her Budget Speech, Smt. Sitharaman said, “The Sports Sector provides multiple
means of employment, skilling and job opportunities. Taking forward the systematic nurturing of
sports talent which is set in motion through the Khelo India programme, I propose to launch a
Khelo India Mission to transform the Sports sector over the next decade.” This step aligns with
the second kartavya outlined by the Budget, namely ‘to fulfil aspirations of our people and build
their capacity, making them strong partners in India’s path to prosperity’.
As stated by the Finance Minister, the Khelo India Mission will facilitate the following:
 An integrated talent development pathway, supported by training centres at the
foundational, intermediate and elite levels,
 Systematic development of coaches and support staff,
 Integration of sports science and technology,
 Competitions and leagues to promote sports culture and provide platforms; and,
 Development of sports infrastructure for training and competition.
***
NB/SR/RC
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
INDIA ON TRACK TO REACH DEBT-TO-GDP RATIO OF 50±1 PERCENT BY 2030-31
FISCAL DEFICIT TO REMAIN AT4.4 PERCENT OF GDP AS PER RE 2025-26
FISCAL DEFICIT ESTIMATED TO BE 4.3 PERCENT OF GDP IN BE 2026-27
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE STANDS AT 11 LAKH CRORE OF TOTAL EXPENDITURE OF
49.6 LAKH CRORE AS PER RE 2025-26
CENTRE’S NET TAX RECEIPTS TO TOUCH 26.7 LAKH CRORE
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
While presenting the Union Budget 2026-27in Parliament today, Union Minister for Finance and
Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman stated, “Government has been delivering onfiscal
commitments consistently without compromising on social needs.” In line with this, the debt-to-GDP
ratio is estimated to be 55.6 percent of GDP in BE 2026-27, compared to 56.1 percent of GDP in RE
2025-26. A declining debt-to-GDP ratio will gradually free up resources for priority sectorexpenditure by
reducing the outgo on interest payments.
Fiscal Deficit
While speaking about Fiscal deficit, one of the main operational instruments for debt targeting, Smt.
Sitharaman informedthe parliament tha commitment made in FY 2021-22 to reduce fiscal deficit below
4.5 percent of GDP by 2025-26 has been fulfilled. In RE 2025-26, the fiscal deficit has been estimated at
par with BE of 2025-26 at 4.4 percent of GDP. In line with the new fiscal prudence path of debt
consolidation, the fiscal deficit in BE 2026-27 is estimated to be 4.3 percent of GDP.”
Revised Estimates (RE) 2025-26.
The Finance Minister informedthat,“ The RE of the non-debt receipts are ₹34 lakh crore of which the
Centre’s net tax receipts are ₹26.7 lakh crore. The Revised Estimate of the total expenditure is ₹49.6 lakh
crore, of which the capital expenditure is about ₹11 lakh crore.”
Budget Estimates (BE) 2026-27
The Union Finance Minister stated that, “The non-debt receipts and the total expenditure are estimated
as ₹36.5 lakh crore and ₹53.5 lakh crore respectively. The Centre’s net tax receipts are estimated at
₹28.7 lakh crore.”
Gross Market Borrowings
The Union Finance Ministersaid that “To finance the fiscal deficit, the net market borrowings from dated
securities are estimated at ₹11.7 lakh crore. The balance financing is expected tocome from small
savings and other sources. The gross market borrowings are estimated at ₹17.2 lakh crore.”
NB/PS
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DIVYANG KAUSHAL YOJANA TO PROVIDE CUSTOMIZED TRAINING TO
DIVYANGJAN IN IT, AVGC AND HOSPITALITY SECTORS
DIVYANG SAHARA YOJANA TO SET UP ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGY MART AS
MODERN RETAIL-STYLE CENTRES FOR DIVYANGJANS
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
The Union Minster of Finance and Corporate Affairs Smt Nirmala Sitharaman, while
presenting the Union Budget 2026-2027 in the Parliament today said that our vision of Sabka
Sath, Sabka Vikas, is to ensure that every family, community, region and sector has access to
resources, amenities and opportunities for meaningful participation. To achieve this goal, the
Finance Minister announced the following for divyangjan:
Divyangjan Kaushal Yojana: IT, AVGC sectors, Hospitality and Food and Beverages sectors
offer task-oriented and process-driven roles, which are suitable for Divyangjans. This will
ensure dignified livelihood opportunities through industry-relevant and customized training
specific to each divyang group.
Divyang Sahara Yojana: Timely access to high-quality assistive devices for all eligible
Divyangjans is a fundamental need. The budget proposes to (i) support the Artificial Limbs
Manufacturing Corporation of India (ALIMCO) to scale up production of assistive devices,
invest in R&D and AI integration, (ii) strengthen PM Divyasha Kendras and support setting
up of Assistive Technology Marts as modern retail-style centres where Divyangjans and
senior citizens can see, try and purchase assistive products.
NB/ Pankaj Srivastav
Finance Minister announced the following for divyangjan:
Divyangjan Kaushal Yojana: IT, AVGC sectors, Hospitality and Food and Beverages sectors
offer task-oriented and process-driven roles, which are suitable for Divyangjans. This will ensure
dignified livelihood opportunities through industry-relevant and customized training specific to
each divyang group.
Divyang Sahara Yojana: Timely access to high-quality assistive devices for all eligible
Divyangjans is a fundamental need. The budget proposes to (i) support the Artificial Limbs
Manufacturing Corporation of India (ALIMCO) to scale up production of assistive devices,
invest in R&D and AI integration, (ii) strengthen PM Divyasha Kendras and support setting up
of Assistive Technology Marts as modern retail-style centres where Divyangjans and senior
citizens can see, try and purchase assistive products.
NB/ Pankaj Srivastav
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
***
GOVERNMENT ACCEPTS 16TH FINANCE COMMISSION’S RECOMMENDATION
TO RETAIN VERTICAL SHARE OF DEVOLUTION AT 41 PERCENT
₹1.4 LAKH CR. TO BE GIVEN TO STATES AS FINANCE COMMISSION GRANTS
FOR FY 2026-27
New Delhi, 1st February, 2026
The Government has accepted the recommendation of the 16th Finance Commission to retain the
vertical share of devolution at 41 percent.
Presenting the Union Budget 2026-27 in Parliament today, Union Minister of Finance &
Corporate Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman said, “The Government has accepted the
recommendation of the Commission to retain the vertical share of devolution at 41 percent. As
recommended by the Commission, I have provided ₹1.4 lakh crore to the States for the FY 2026-
27 as Finance Commission Grants. These include Rural and Urban Local Body and Disaster
Management Grants.”
She further said that the Commission submitted its report to the President on 17th November
2025 and the Government is to lay the report along with the explanatory memorandum on the
action taken report on the recommendations of the Commission in Parliament as mandated under
Article 281 of the Constitution.
***
NB /ISA
PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
New Delhi, 1st February 2026
INDIA’S REAL GDP ESTIMATED TO GROW BY 7.4% IN FY 2025–26, WITH NOMINAL
GDP GROWTH AT 8%
IN THE BUDGET FOR FY 2026-27, NOMINAL GDP IS PROJECTED TO GROW BY 10.0%
OVER THE FIRST ADVANCE ESTIMATES OF FY 2025-26
SERVICE SECTOR REMAINS PRIMARY DRIVER OF GROWTH, EXPANDING BY 9.1%
TOTAL RESOURCES SHARED WITH STATES THROUGH THE FINANCE COMMISSION
ROUTE ESTIMATED AT ₹16.56 LAKH CRORE IN BE 2026-27; INCLUDING TAX
DEVOLUTION(₹15.26 LAKH CRORE) AND FC GRANTS(₹1.4 LAKH CRORE),
THE EFFECTIVE CAPITAL EXPENDITURE OF UNION GOVERNMENT IN FY 2026-27
ESTIMATED AT ₹17.15 LAKH CRORE, THAT IS 4.4% OF GDP
EFFECTIVE CAPITAL EXPENDITURE OF THE UNION GOVERNMENT INCLUDES
GOI’S CAPITAL EXPENDITURE (₹12.22 LAKH CRORE) AND GRANTS-IN-AID TO
STATES (₹4.93 LAKH CRORE) FOR CREATION OF CAPITAL ASSETS
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT DEBT TO GDP IS ESTIMATED AT 55.6% IN BE 2026-27, AS
AGAINST 56.1% IN FY2025-26
PRIVATE FINAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURE (PFCE) IS PROJECTED TO GROW BY
7%, ACCOUNTING FOR 61.5% OF GDP - THE HIGHEST LEVEL SINCE FY12
GROSS FIXED CAPITAL FORMATION (GFCF) RISES BY 7.8% IN FY26
FISCAL DEFICIT FOR BE 2026-27 IS ESTIMATED AT 4.3%, WHILE FISCAL DEFICIT
FOR RE 2025-26 IS 4.4%
REVENUE DEFICIT FOR BE 2026-27 IS ESTIMATED AT 1.5%; EFFECTIVE REVENUE
DEFICIT FOR BE 2026-27 ESTIMATED AT 0.3%
GROSS TAX REVENUE IS ESTIMATED AT 11.2% OF GDP FOR BE 2026-27
THE CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICIT DECLINED TO 0.8 PER CENT OF GDP IN H1 FY26
FROM 1.3 PER CENT IN H1 FY25.
INDIA’S TOTAL EXPORTS REACHED USD 825.3 BILLION IN FY25; DESPITE
UNCERTAIN GLOBAL TARIFF SCENARIO
GROSS FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT (FDI) INFLOWS WERE RECORDED AT USD
81.0 BILLION IN FY25
India’s growth outlook remains positive, supported by strong domestic demand, structural reforms, and a
stable macroeconomic environment. The country received three sovereign rating upgrades during the
year. Inflation outlook remains benign, as per Macroeconomic Framework Statement and Medium-term
Fiscal Policy cum Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement laid by Union Minister for Finance and Corporate
Affairs, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman on the table of the Parliament along with Budget for FY 2026-27. The
document further adds that public investment, deregulation, labor market reforms, human capital
investments, tax reforms, digital transformation, and the formalization of the economy are expected to
drive the economy into a higher growth trajectory. Strong balance sheets in the corporate and financial
sectors are also expected to drive a virtuous cycle of growth, fuelled by increased private-sector
investment.
MACRO-ECONOMIC FRAMEWORK STATEMENT
Economic growth
As per the first advance estimates published by the National Statistics Office, India’s real GDP is
estimated to grow by 7.4 per cent in FY 2025–26, with nominal GDP growth at 8 per cent. The services
sector remains the primary growth driver, expanding by 9.1 per cent. Manufacturing and construction
have grown by 7 per cent. Agriculture is estimated to grow at 3.1 per cent. In the Budget for FY 2026-27,
nominal GDP is projected to grow by 10.0 per cent over the First Advance Estimates of FY 2025-26.
Consumption and Investment
Domestic demand continues to anchor growth. Private final consumption expenditure (PFCE) is projected
to grow by 7 per cent, accounting for 61.5 per cent of GDP - the highest level since FY12. Government
final consumption expenditure is also estimated to strongly rebound with a YoY growth of 5.2 per cent in
FY26 as against 2.3 per cent in FY25. High-frequency indicators, such as UPI transactions, air and rail
traffic, e-way bills, etc., reflect sustained momentum in both urban and rural consumption. Investment
activity remains strong, with gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) rising by 7.8 per cent in FY26, higher
than the previous year. Further, the share of GFCF has remained stable at around 30 per cent of GDP for
the past three years.
External sector
India’s total exports (merchandise and services) reached USD 825.3 billion in FY25, with continued
momentum in FY26. Despite tariffs imposed by the United States, merchandise exports grew by 2.4 per
cent (April–December 2025), while services exports increased by 6.5 per cent. Merchandise imports for
April-December 2025 increased by 5.9 per cent. Gross Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) inflows were
recorded at USD 81.0 billion in FY25, and the momentum strengthened in FY26 with the highest inflow
recorded in the first seven months of any financial year. The current account deficit declined to 0.8 per
cent of GDP in H1 FY26 from 1.3 per cent in H1 FY25.
MEDIUM TERM FISCAL POLICY CUM STRATEGY STATEMENT
Fiscal Indicators
Union Budget 2026-27 has as its fiscal anchor the debt glide path indicated in Budget 2025-26 and
Budget 2024-25 (regular) and is being presented against the backdrop of ongoing fiscal consolidation
announced in FY 2021-22, which has provided a good foundation for making available the resources
required to balance the development priorities without compromising on fiscal prudence. As announced in
Budget 2021-22, the Government made true its intention of reaching a fiscal deficit below 4.5 per cent of
GDP in FY 2025-26. Going ahead, it would be the Endeavour of the Government to adopt a fiscal stance
that would put the Central Government debt on a declining path. Major fiscal indicators of the Union
Government in the Revised Estimates (RE) of FY 2025-26 and the Budget Estimates (BE) of FY 2026-27
as a per cent of GDP, are summarized in the table below.
Receipts
In BE 2026-27, Gross Tax Revenue (GTR) is estimated at ₹44.04 lakh crore. It represents a growth of 8.0
per cent over RE 2025-26. Direct Taxes at ₹26.97 lakh crore are the major contributor to GTR (61.2 per
cent of the GTR). Indirect taxes are estimated at ₹17.07 lakh crore. In BE 2026-27, the GTR to GDP ratio
is estimated at 11.2 per cent. The Budget 2026-27 is also the first year of the award period of Sixteenth
Finance Commission (SFC). SFC has recommended for retaining the share of devolution to the States at
41 per cent of divisible pool. The Tax Revenues (Net to Centre) are projected to be ₹28.67 lakh crore. In
BE 2026-27, NTR of the Central Government is projected at ₹6.66 lakh crore. Revenue Receipts of the
Union Government [comprising Tax Revenues (Net to Centre) and Non- Tax Revenues (NTR)], are
estimated at ₹35.33 lakh crore. Revenue Receipt estimates assume a growth of 5.7 per cent over RE 2025-
26.
Expenditure
The total expenditure of the Central Government in BE 2026-27 is projected to be ₹53.47 lakh crore (13.6
per cent of GDP) showing a growth of 7.7 per cent over RE 2025-26 of ₹49.65 lakh crore. The Budget for
FY 2026-27 projects ₹12.22 lakh crore (3.1 per cent of GDP) towards capital expenditure. This includes
capital support to States through SASCI (Special Assistance as Loan to States for Capital Expenditure)
with an outlay of ₹2.0 lakh crore. Effective Capital Expenditure of the Union Government includes GoI’s
capital expenditure and Grants-in-aid for creation of capital assets. Together, they constitute investments
that enhance and upgrade productive capacity of the economy. In BE 2026-27, the allocation under
Grants in- aid for creation of capital assets is projected at ₹4.93 lakh crore (or 1.3 per cent of GDP). Thus,
The effective capital expenditure in FY 2026-27 is estimated at ₹17.15 lakh crore (or 4.4 per cent of
GDP).
Tax devolution and Finance Commission grants to the states
Based on recommendations of the Finance Commission (FC), the Union Government devolves taxes to
States during the FC cycle. As mentioned previously, SFC recommended retaining States’ share at 41 per
cent in the divisible pool, and this recommendation is accepted by the Government. In BE 2026-27, tax
devolution to the States is estimated at ₹15.26 lakh crore compared to ₹13.93 lakh crore in RE 2025-26
which includes an additional amount of ₹9,084.02 crore on account of dues receivable by the Union
Government from States under devolution from the previous years. Tax devolution to the States in BE
2026-27 is 3.9 per cent of GDP and ₹1.33 lakh crore more than tax devolution of RE 2025-26 (including
past arrears). In BE 2026-27, the Finance Commission grants are estimated at ₹1.4 lakh crore. Thus, total
resources shared, tax devolution and FC Grants, with States through the Finance Commission route are
estimated at ₹16.56 lakh crore in BE 2026-27.
Fiscal policy strategy for 2026-27
The fiscal policy strategy for FY 2026-27 will continue to be guided by the debt glide path indicated in
the Budget 2025-26. The medium-term aim to reach a debt to GDP ratio of 50±1 per cent by FY 2030-31,
with the fiscal deficit acting as the operational target. In line with the above targets, it is estimated that
Central Government debt to GDP ratio will be 55.6 per cent of GDP in BE 2026-27 with Fiscal Deficit
target of 4.3 per cent of GDP. Other aspects of the fiscal strategy include support to economic growth
through continued focus on capital expenditure, leaving adequate fiscal room to respond to global
economic events and to ensure continued prosperity of the country in its journey towards Viksit Bharat.
Other aspects include reforms in tax policy, expenditure policy, government borrowings, Lending and
Investments.
***
Nanu Bhasin/Virat M/Mahesh Z/Prakash Patil